= flush: abort a message

    size[4] Tflush tag[2] oldtag[2]
    size[4] Rflush tag[2]

When  the  response to a request is no longer needed, such as
when a user interrupts  a  process  doing  a  sys-read(2),  a
Tflush  request  is  sent  to the server to purge the pending
response.  The message being flushed is identified by oldtag.
The semantics of flush depends on messages arriving in order.

The  server  should answer the flush message immediately.  If
it recognizes oldtag as the tag of a pending transaction,  it
should  abort  any pending response and discard that tag.  In
either case, it should respond with an Rflush echoing the tag
(not  oldtag)  of  the Tflush message.  A Tflush can never be
responded to by an Rerror message.

The server may respond to the pending request before respond‐
ing  to the Tflush.  It is possible for a client to send mul‐
tiple Tflush messages for a particular pending request.  Each
subsequent Tflush must contain as oldtag the tag of the pend‐
ing  request  (not  a  previous  Tflush).   Should   multiple
Tflushes  be  received  for  a  pending request, they must be
answered in  order.   An  Rflush  for  any  of  the  multiple
Tflushes implies an answer for all previous ones.  Therefore,
should a server receive a request and then  multiple  flushes
for that request, it need respond only to the last flush.

When  the  client sends a Tflush, it must wait to receive the
corresponding Rflush before  reusing  oldtag  for  subsequent
messages.   If  a response to the flushed request is received
before the Rflush, the client must honor the response  as  if
it had not been flushed, since the completed request may sig‐
nify a state change in the server.  For instance, Tcreate may
have  created  a file and Twalk may have allocated a fid.  If
no response is received before the Rflush, the flushed trans‐
action  is  considered  to have been cancelled, and should be
treated as though it had never been sent.

Several exceptional conditions are handled correctly  by  the
above  specification:  sending  multiple flushes for a single
tag, flushing after a transaction is  completed,  flushing  a
Tflush, and flushing an invalid tag.


== related

    sys-read(2)
