= button: Create and manipulate button widgets

    button pathName ?options?

== standard OPTIONS
-activebackground -disabledcolor      -justify
-activeforeground -font               -relief
-anchor           -foreground         -takefocus
-background       -highlightcolor     -text
-bitmap           -highlightthickness -underline
-borderwidth      -image

== widget-SPECIFIC OPTIONS
-command tkcmd
       Specifies  a  Tk command to associate with the button.
       This command is typically invoked when mouse button  1
       is released over the button window.

-height dist
       Specifies  a  desired  height for the button.  If this
       option isn't specified, the button's desired height is
       computed  from the size of the image or bitmap or text
       being displayed in it.

-state state
       Specifies one of three states for the button:  normal,
       active,  or  disabled.   In normal state the button is
       displayed using the foreground and background options.
       The active state is typically used when the pointer is
       over the button.  In active state the button  is  dis‐
       played using the activeForeground and activeBackground
       options.  Disabled state means that the button  should
       be  insensitive:   the default bindings will refuse to
       activate the  widget  and  will  ignore  mouse  button
       presses.   In  this state the background option deter‐
       mines how the button is displayed.

-width dist
       Specifies a desired width for  the  button.   If  this
       option  isn't specified, the button's desired width is
       computed from the size of the image or bitmap or  text
       being displayed in it.

The  button  command creates a new window (given by the path‐
Name argument) and makes it into a button widget.  Additional
options,  described  above,  may  be specified on the command
line.  to  configure  aspects  of  the  button  such  as  its
colours,  font, text, and initial relief.  The button command
returns its pathName argument.  At the time this  command  is
invoked, there must not exist a window named pathName.

A  button  is a widget that displays a textual string, bitmap
or image.  If text is displayed, it must all be in  a  single
font,  but  it can occupy multiple lines on the screen (if it
contains newlines) and one of the characters  may  optionally
be  underlined  using  the  underline option.  It can display
itself in either of three different ways,  according  to  the
state  option;  it  can  be made to appear raised, sunken, or
flat.  When a user invokes the button (by pressing mouse but‐
ton  1  with the cursor over the button), then the Tk command
specified in the -command option is invoked.

== widget COMMAND
The button command creates a new Tk  command  whose  name  is
pathName.   This command may be used to invoke various opera‐
tions on the widget.  It has the following general form:
       pathName option ?arg arg ...?
Option and the args determine the exact behaviour of the com‐
mand.   The  following  commands are possible for button wid‐
gets:

pathName cget option
       Returns the current value of the configuration  option
       given  by  option.   Option may have any of the values
       accepted by the button command.

pathName configure ?option? ?value option value ...?
       Query or modify the configuration options of the  wid‐
       get.  If no option is specified, returns a list of all
       of the available options for pathName. If one or  more
       option-value  pairs  are  specified,  then the command
       modifies the given widget option(s) to have the  given
       value(s);   in  this case the command returns an empty
       string.  Option may have any of the values accepted by
       the button command.

pathName invoke
       Invoke  the  Tk command associated with the button, if
       there is one.  The return value is  the  return  value
       from the Tk command, or an empty string if there is no
       command associated with the button.  This  command  is
       ignored if the button's state is disabled.

== default BINDINGS
Tk  automatically creates bindings for buttons that give them
the following default behaviour:

[1]    A button activates whenever the mouse passes  over  it
       and deactivates whenever the mouse leaves the button.

[2]    A  button's relief is changed to sunken whenever mouse
       button 1 is pressed over the button, and the relief is
       restored  to its original value when button 1 is later
       released.

[3]    If mouse button 1 is pressed over a button  and  later
       released over the button, the button is invoked.  How‐
       ever, if the mouse is not over the button when  button
       1 is released, then no invocation occurs.

[4]    If  the  Enter or Space key is pressed when the button
       has keyboard focus, the button is invoked.

If the button's state is disabled  then  none  of  the  above
actions occur:  the button is completely non-responsive.

The behaviour of buttons can be changed by defining new bind‐
ings for individual widgets.

== see ALSO
checkbutton(9), choicebutton(9), options(9),  radiobutton(9),
types(9)

