= choicebutton: create and manipulate choicebutton widgets

    choicebutton pathName ?options?

== standard OPTIONS
-activebackground -borderwidth      -relief
-activeforeground -font             -text
-anchor           -foreground
-background       -image
-bitmap           -justify

== widget-SPECIFIC OPTIONS
-command command
       Specifies  a  Tk command to associate with the button.
       This command is typically invoked when mouse button  1
       is  released  over  the  button  window.  The button's
       global variable (-variable  option)  will  be  updated
       before the command is invoked.

-height dist
       Specifies  a  desired  height for the button.  If this
       option isn't specified, the button's desired height is
       computed  from  the  size  of  the highest item in the
       -values list.

-selectcolor colour
       Specifies a background colour to use when  the  button
       is selected.  If specified as an empty string, no spe‐
       cial colour is used for displaying when the widget  is
       selected.

-values list
       Specifies  a  list  of all the values the choicebutton
       can choose from.

-variable string
       Specifies name of global variable to set whenever this
       button  is  selected.  The variable will be set to the
       index of the currently selected item. Changes in  this
       variable also cause the button to choose the appropri‐
       ate item (provided it is an integer and within range).

-width dist
       Specifies a desired width for  the  button.   If  this
       option  isn't specified, the button's desired width is
       computed from the size of the widest item in the -val‐
       ues list.

The  choicebutton  command creates a new window (given by the
pathName argument) and makes it into a  choicebutton  widget.
Additional  options, described above, may be specified on the
command line to configure aspects of the choicebutton such as
its  colours, font, text, and initial relief.  The choicebut‐
ton command returns its pathName argument.  At the time  this
command is invoked, there must not exist a window named path‐
Name.

A choicebutton is a widget that displays  a  textual  string,
one  of  the  items given in the list argument to the -values
option.  When clicked on, the choicebutton  displays  a  menu
showing  all  the  available  choices,  allowing  the user to
change the choice by selecting an item.  In  the  description
below,  an index is a zero-based index into the set of values
specified with the -values option.

== widget COMMAND
The choicebutton command creates a new Tk command whose  name
is  pathName.   This  command  may  be used to invoke various
operations on the widget.  It has the following general form:
       pathName option ?arg arg ...?
Option and the args determine the exact behaviour of the com‐
mand.   The  following commands are possible for choicebutton
widgets:

pathName cget option
       Returns the current value of the configuration  option
       given  by  option.   Option may have any of the values
       accepted by the choicebutton command.

pathName configure ?option? ?value option value ...?
       Query or modify the configuration options of the  wid‐
       get.  If no option is specified, returns a list of all
       of the available options for pathName.  If one or more
       option-value pairs are specified, the command modifies
       the given widget option(s) to have the given value(s);
       in  this  case  the  command  returns an empty string.
       Option may have any of  the  values  accepted  by  the
       choicebutton command.

pathName get ?value?
       Get  the index of the first item with value.  If value
       is not given, get the index of the currently  selected
       item.

pathName set index
       Sets the current item to the indexth value.

pathName getvalue ?index?
       Get  the  value  of  the indexth item. If index is not
       given, get the value of the currently selected item.

pathName setvalue value
       Set the current item to the first item  having  value.
       If  no  item has that value, no change is made, and an
       error is returned.

pathName invoke index
       Does just what would have happened if the user invoked
       the  choicebutton with the mouse and selected the item
       at index: sets the current item to index and runs  its
       associated  Tk  command,  if there is one.  The return
       value is that from invoking  the  Tk  command,  or  an
       empty string if there is no associated command.

pathName valuecount
       Returns the number of values configured in the choice‐
       button.

== see ALSO
button(9),   checkbutton(9),   options(9),    radiobutton(9),
types(9)

