ENTRY(9)              Kernel Developer's Manual             ENTRY(9)

NAME
       entry - Create and manipulate entry widgets

SYNOPSIS
       entry pathName ?options?

STANDARD OPTIONS
       -background  -highlightcolor     -selectbackground
       -borderwidth -highlightthickness -selectforeground
       -font        -justify            -takefocus
       -foreground  -relief             -xscrollcommand

WIDGET-SPECIFIC OPTIONS
       -show string
              If this option is specified, then the true contents of
              the entry are not displayed in the  window.   Instead,
              each  character in the entry's value will be displayed
              as the first character in the value  of  this  option,
              such  as  ``*''.   This is useful, for example, if the
              entry is to be used to enter a password.

       -state state
              Specifies one of two states for the entry:  normal  or
              disabled.  If the entry is disabled then the value may
              not be changed using widget commands and no  insertion
              cursor  will  be displayed, even if the input focus is
              in the widget.

       -width dist
              Specifies an  integer  value  indicating  the  desired
              width of the entry window.

DESCRIPTION
       The entry command creates a new window (given by the pathName
       argument) and makes it  into  an  entry  widget.   Additional
       options,  described  above,  may  be specified on the command
       line to configure aspects of the entry such as  its  colours,
       font,  and  relief.   The  entry command returns its pathName
       argument.  At the time this command is  invoked,  there  must
       not exist a window named pathName.

       An entry is a widget that displays a one-line text string and
       allows  that  string  to  be  edited  using  widget  commands
       described  below, which are typically bound to keystrokes and
       mouse actions.  When first  created,  an  entry's  string  is
       empty.   A  portion of the entry may be selected as described
       below.  Entries observe the standard  Tk  rules  for  dealing
       with  the  input focus.  When an entry has the input focus it
       displays an insertion cursor to indicate where new characters
       will be inserted.

       Entries  are  capable of displaying strings that are too long
       to fit entirely within the widget's window.   In  this  case,
       only  a  portion  of  the string will be displayed;  commands
       described below may be used to change the view in the window.
       Entries  use the standard xscrollcommand mechanism for inter‐
       acting with scrollbars (see the description of  the  xscroll‐
       command option for details).

WIDGET COMMAND
       The  entry  command  creates  a  new Tk command whose name is
       pathName.  This command may be used to invoke various  opera‐
       tions on the widget.  It has the following general form:
              pathName option ?arg arg ...?
       Option and the args determine the exact behaviour of the com‐
       mand.

       Many of the widget commands for  entries  take  one  or  more
       indices  as arguments.  An index specifies a particular char‐
       acter in the entry's string, in any of the following ways:

       number      Specifies the character  as  a  numerical  index,
                   where 0 corresponds to the first character in the
                   string.

       anchor      Indicates the anchor  point  for  the  selection,
                   which  is  set  with  the  select from and select
                   adjust widget commands.

       end         Indicates the character just after the  last  one
                   in  the  entry's  string.   This is equivalent to
                   specifying a numerical index equal to the  length
                   of the entry's string.

       insert      Indicates  the  character adjacent to and immedi‐
                   ately following the insertion cursor.

       sel.first   Indicates the first character in  the  selection.
                   It  is an error to use this form if the selection
                   isn't in the entry window.

       sel.last    Indicates the character just after the  last  one
                   in  the  selection.   It  is an error to use this
                   form if the selection isn't in the entry window.

       @number     In this form, number is treated as  an  x-coordi‐
                   nate  in the entry's window;  the character span‐
                   ning that x-coordinate  is  used.   For  example,
                   ``@0''  indicates  the left-most character in the
                   window.

       The following commands are possible for entry widgets:

       pathName bbox index
              Returns a list of four numbers describing the bounding
              box  of  the  character given by index.  The first two
              elements of the list give the x and y  coordinates  of
              the  upper-left  corner  of the screen area covered by
              the character (in pixels relative to the  widget)  and
              the last two elements give the width and height of the
              character, in pixels.  The bounding box may refer to a
              region outside the visible area of the window.

       pathName cget option
              Returns  the current value of the configuration option
              given by option.  Option may have any  of  the  values
              accepted by the entry command.

       pathName configure ?option? ?value option value ...?
              Query  or modify the configuration options of the wid‐
              get.  If no option is specified, returns a list of all
              of the available options for pathName.  If one or more
              option-value pairs are  specified,  then  the  command
              modifies  the given widget option(s) to have the given
              value(s);  in this case the command returns  an  empty
              string.  Option may have any of the values accepted by
              the entry command.

       pathName delete first ?last?
              Delete one or more elements of the  entry.   First  is
              the  index  of the first character to delete, and last
              is the index of the character just after the last  one
              to  delete.   If  last  isn't specified it defaults to
              first+1, i.e. a single  character  is  deleted.   This
              command returns an empty string.

       pathName get
              Returns the entry's string.

       pathName icursor index
              Arrange  for the insertion cursor to be displayed just
              before the character given by index.  Returns an empty
              string.

       pathName index index
              Returns the numerical index corresponding to index.

       pathName insert index string
              Insert  the characters of string just before the char‐
              acter indicated by index.  Returns an empty string.

       pathName see index
              Adjusts the view in the window so that  the  character
              given by index is completely visible.

       pathName selection option arg
              This command is used to adjust the selection within an
              entry.  It has several forms, depending on option:

              pathName selection adjust index
                     Locate the end of the selection nearest to  the
                     character  given  by index, and adjust that end
                     of the selection to be at index (i.e  including
                     but  not going beyond index).  The other end of
                     the selection is  made  the  anchor  point  for
                     future  select  to  commands.  If the selection
                     isn't currently in the entry, then a new selec‐
                     tion  is  created  to  include  the  characters
                     between index and  the  most  recent  selection
                     anchor  point,  inclusive.   Returns  an  empty
                     string.

              pathName selection clear
                     Clear the selection if it is currently in  this
                     widget.   If the selection isn't in this widget
                     then the command has  no  effect.   Returns  an
                     empty string.

              pathName selection from index
                     Set  the  selection anchor point to just before
                     the character given by index.   Doesn't  change
                     the selection.  Returns an empty string.

              pathName selection present
                     Returns  1  if there are characters selected in
                     the entry, 0 if nothing is selected.

              pathName selection range start end
                     Sets the selection to  include  the  characters
                     starting with the one indexed by start and end‐
                     ing with the  one  just  before  end.   If  end
                     refers  to  the  same  character as start or an
                     earlier one,  then  the  entry's  selection  is
                     cleared.

              pathName selection to index
                     If  index  is  before the anchor point, set the
                     selection to the characters from  index  up  to
                     but  not  including the anchor point.  If index
                     is the same as the anchor  point,  do  nothing.
                     If  index  is  after  the anchor point, set the
                     selection to the  characters  from  the  anchor
                     point  up  to  but  not  including  index.  The
                     anchor point is determined by the  most  recent
                     select  from  or  select adjust command in this
                     widget.  If the selection isn't in this  widget
                     then  a new selection is created using the most
                     recent anchor point specified for  the  widget.
                     Returns an empty string.

       pathName xview args
              This  command is used to query and change the horizon‐
              tal position of the text in the widget's  window.   It
              can take any of the following forms:

              pathName xview
                     Returns  a  list containing two elements.  Each
                     element is a real fraction  between  0  and  1;
                     together they describe the horizontal span that
                     is visible in the window.  For example, if  the
                     first  element  is .2 and the second element is
                     .6, 20% of the entry's text  is  off-screen  to
                     the left, the middle 40% is visible in the win‐
                     dow, and 40% of the text is off-screen  to  the
                     right.   These  are  the  same values passed to
                     scrollbars via the -xscrollcommand option.

              pathName xview index
                     Adjusts the view in  the  window  so  that  the
                     character  given  by  index is displayed at the
                     left edge of the window.

              pathName xview moveto fraction
                     Adjusts the view in  the  window  so  that  the
                     character  fraction of the way through the text
                     appears at the left edge of the window.   Frac‐
                     tion must be a fraction between 0 and 1.

              pathName xview scroll number what
                     This command shifts the view in the window left
                     or right according to number and what.   Number
                     must  be an integer.  What must be either units
                     or pages.  If what is units, the  view  adjusts
                     left  or  right by number average-width charac‐
                     ters on the display;  if it is pages  then  the
                     view  adjusts  by number screenfuls.  If number
                     is negative then characters farther to the left
                     become visible;  if it is positive then charac‐
                     ters farther to the right become visible.

DEFAULT BINDINGS
       Tk automatically creates bindings for entries that give  them
       the  following default behaviour.  In the descriptions below,
       ``word'' refers to a contiguous group of letters, digits,  or
       ``_'' characters, or any single character other than these.

       [1]    Clicking mouse button 1 positions the insertion cursor
              just before the character underneath the mouse cursor,
              sets  the  input  focus to this widget, and clears any
              selection in the widget.  Dragging with mouse button 1
              strokes  out  a selection between the insertion cursor
              and the character under the mouse.

       [2]    Double-clicking with mouse button 1 selects  the  word
              under  the mouse and positions the insertion cursor at
              the beginning of the word.

       [3]    If any normal printing  characters  are  typed  in  an
              entry,  the current selection is deleted, and they are
              inserted at the point of the insertion cursor

       [4]    The view in the entry can be adjusted by dragging with
              mouse button 2.

       [5]    The  Left and Right keys move the insertion cursor one
              character to the left or right;  they also  clear  any
              selection  in  the entry and set the selection anchor.
              Control-b and Control-f behave the same  as  Left  and
              Right, respectively.

       [6]    The  Home  key,  or Control-a, will move the insertion
              cursor to the beginning of the  entry  and  clear  any
              selection in the entry.

       [7]    The  End  key,  or  Control-e, will move the insertion
              cursor to the end of the entry and clear any selection
              in the entry.

       [8]    Control-/ selects all the text in the entry.

       [9]    Control-\ clears any selection in the entry.

       [10]   The  Delete key deletes the selection, if there is one
              in the entry.  If there is no  selection,  it  deletes
              the character to the right of the insertion cursor.

       [11]   The  BackSpace key and Control-h delete the selection,
              if there is one in the entry.  If there is  no  selec‐
              tion,  it  deletes  the  character  to the left of the
              insertion cursor.

       [12]   Control-d deletes the character to the  right  of  the
              insertion cursor.

       [13]   Control-k  deletes  all the characters to the right of
              the insertion cursor.

       [14]   Control-w deletes the word to the left of  the  inser‐
              tion cursor.

       If  the  entry  is disabled using the -state option, then the
       entry's view can still be adjusted and text in the entry  can
       still  be selected, but no insertion cursor will be displayed
       and no text modifications will take place.

       The behaviour of entries can be changed by defining new bind‐
       ings for individual widgets.

SEE ALSO
       options(9), types(9)

                                                            ENTRY(9)
