= frame: Create and manipulate frame widgets

    frame pathName ?options?

== standard OPTIONS
-borderwidth -relief

== widget-SPECIFIC OPTIONS
-background colour
       This  option  is  the  same as the standard background
       option except that its value may also be specified  as
       an  empty  string.  In this case, the widget will dis‐
       play no background or border, and no colours  will  be
       consumed  from  its  colourmap  for its background and
       border.

-height dist
       Specifies the desired height for the window.  If  this
       option  is  less than or equal to zero then the window
       will not request any size at all.

-width dist
       Specifies the desired width for the window.   If  this
       option  is  less than or equal to zero then the window
       will not request any size at all.

The frame command creates a new window (given by the pathName
argument)  and  makes  it  into  a  frame widget.  Additional
options, described above, may be  specified  on  the  command
line to configure aspects of the frame such as its background
colour and relief.  The frame command returns the  path  name
of the new window.

A frame is a simple widget.  Its primary purpose is to act as
a spacer or container for complex window layouts.   The  only
features of a frame are its background colour and an optional
3-D border to make the frame appear raised or sunken.

== widget COMMAND
The frame command creates a new  Tk  command  whose  name  is
pathName..  This command may be used to invoke various opera‐
tions on the widget.  It has the following general form:
       pathName option ?arg arg ...?
PathName is the name of the command, which is the same as the
frame  widget's path name.  Option and the args determine the
exact behaviour of the command.  The following  commands  are
possible for frame widgets:

pathName cget option
       Returns  the current value of the configuration option
       given by option.  Option may have any  of  the  values
       accepted by the frame command.

pathName configure ?option? ?value option value ...?
       Query  or modify the configuration options of the wid‐
       get.  If no option is specified, returns a list of all
       of the available options for pathName.  If one or more
       option-value pairs are  specified,  then  the  command
       modifies  the given widget option(s) to have the given
       value(s);  in this case the command returns  an  empty
       string.  Option may have any of the values accepted by
       the frame command.

== bindings
When a new frame is created, it has no  default  event  bind‐
ings: frames are not intended to be interactive.

== see ALSO
options(9), types(9)

