= grab :  Confine pointer and keyboard events to a window subtree

    grab what ?arg arg ...?

This command implements simple pointer grabbing for Tk.  When
a  grab  is  set  for  a  particular window, Tk restricts all
pointer events to the grab window and its descendants in Tk's
window  hierarchy.   Whenever  the pointer is within the grab
window's subtree, the pointer will behave exactly the same as
if  there  had  been  no  grab  at all and all events will be
reported in the normal fashion.  When the pointer is  outside
window's  tree,  button presses and releases and mouse motion
events are reported to window, and window  entry  and  window
exit  events  are  ignored.   The  grab  subtree ``owns'' the
pointer: windows outside the grab subtree will be visible  on
the  screen  but  they  will be insensitive until the grab is
released.  The tree of windows underneath the grab window can
include  top-level  windows,  in which case all of those top-
level windows and their descendants will continue to  receive
mouse events during the grab.

A grab locks out all applications on the screen, so that only
the given subtree of the grabbing application will be  sensi‐
tive  to  pointer  events (mouse button presses, mouse button
releases, pointer motions, window entries, and window exits).
During  grabs  the  window  manager  will not receive pointer
events either (which means that if the grab is  not  released
the whole GUI will freeze, so be careful!).

The grab command can take any of the following forms:

grab release window
       Releases the grab on window if there is one, otherwise
       does nothing.  Returns an empty string.

grab set window
       If a grab was already in effect for  this  application
       on window's display then it is automatically released.
       If there is already a grab on window then the  command
       does nothing.  Returns an empty string.

grab ifunset window
       Same as grab set except that window is only grabbed if
       there is no other grab currently in effect.

grab status window
       Returns none if no grab is currently set on window, or
       window if it has the grab.

== bugs
The current application-exclusive nature of grab is a problem
which will be adressed in the future.

