= label: Create and manipulate label widgets

    label pathName ?options?

== standard OPTIONS
-anchor        -font               -justify
-background    -foreground         -relief
-bitmap        -highlightcolor     -takefocus
-borderwidth   -highlightthickness -text
-disabledcolor -image              -underline

== widget-SPECIFIC OPTIONS
-height dist
       Specifies  a  desired  height  for the label.  If this
       option isn't specified, the label's desired height  is
       computed  from the size of the image or bitmap or text
       being displayed in it.

-width dist
       Specifies a desired width  for  the  label.   If  this
       option  isn't  specified, the label's desired width is
       computed from the size of the image or bitmap or  text
       being displayed in it.

The label command creates a new window (given by the pathName
argument) and makes  it  into  a  label  widget.   Additional
options,  described  above,  may  be specified on the command
line to configure aspects of the label such as  its  colours,
font,  text,  and  initial relief.  The label command returns
its pathName argument.  At the time this command is  invoked,
there must not exist a window named pathName.

A label is a widget that displays a textual string, bitmap or
image.  If text is displayed, it must  all  be  in  a  single
font,  but  it can occupy multiple lines on the screen (if it
contains newlines) and one of the characters  may  optionally
be  underlined  using the underline option.  The label can be
manipulated in a few simple ways, such as changing its relief
or text, using the commands described below.

== widget COMMAND
The  label  command  creates  a  new Tk command whose name is
pathName.  This command may be used to invoke various  opera‐
tions on the widget.  It has the following general form:
       pathName option ?arg arg ...?
Option and the args determine the exact behaviour of the com‐
mand.  The following commands are possible for label widgets:

pathName cget option
       Returns the current value of the configuration  option
       given  by  option.   Option may have any of the values
       accepted by the label command.

pathName configure ?option? ?value option value ...?
       Query or modify the configuration options of the  wid‐
       get.  If no option is specified, returns a list of all
       of the available options for pathName.  If one or more
       option-value  pairs  are  specified,  then the command
       modifies the given widget option(s) to have the  given
       value(s);   in  this case the command returns an empty
       string.  Option may have any of the values accepted by
       the label command.

== bindings
When  a  new  label is created, it has no default event bind‐
ings: labels are not intended to be interactive.

== see ALSO
options(9), types(9)

