LISTBOX(9)            Kernel Developer's Manual           LISTBOX(9)

NAME
       listbox - Create and manipulate listbox widgets

SYNOPSIS
       listbox pathName ?options?

STANDARD OPTIONS
       -background  -highlightcolor     -selectforeground
       -borderwidth -highlightthickness -takefocus
       -font        -relief             -width
       -foreground  -selectbackground   -xscrollcommand
       -height      -selectborderwidth  -yscrollcommand

WIDGET-SPECIFIC OPTIONS
       -height dist
              Specifies the desired height for the window.

       -selectmode val
              Specifies  one  of several styles for manipulating the
              selection.  The value of the option may be  arbitrary,
              but  the  default bindings expect it to be either sin‐
              gle, browse, multiple, or extended;  the default value
              is single.

       -width dist
              Specifies the desired width for the window.

DESCRIPTION
       The  listbox command creates a new window (given by the path‐
       Name argument) and makes it into  a  listbox  widget.   Addi‐
       tional options, described above, may be specified on the com‐
       mand line to configure aspects of the  listbox  such  as  its
       colours, font, text, and relief.  The listbox command returns
       its pathName argument.  At the time this command is  invoked,
       there must not exist a window named pathName.

       A  listbox  is  a widget that displays a list of strings, one
       per line.  When first created, a new listbox has no elements.
       Elements  may  be  added  or  deleted  using  widget commands
       described below.  In addition, one or more  elements  may  be
       selected as described below.

       It  is  not necessary for all the elements to be displayed in
       the listbox window at once;  commands described below may  be
       used  to  change  the  view  in  the window.  Listboxes allow
       scrolling in both directions using the standard  -xscrollcom‐
       mand and -yscrollcommand options.

INDICES
       Many  of  the  widget commands for listboxes take one or more
       indices as arguments.  An index specifies a  particular  ele‐
       ment of the listbox, in any of the following ways:

       number      Specifies the element as a numerical index, where
                   0 corresponds to the first element in  the  list‐
                   box.

       active      Indicates  the element that has the location cur‐
                   sor.  This element will be displayed with a high‐
                   light rectangle when the listbox has the keyboard
                   focus, and it is specified with the activate wid‐
                   get command.

       anchor      Indicates  the  anchor  point  for the selection,
                   which is set with  the  selection  anchor  widget
                   command.

       end         Indicates  the end of the listbox.  For some com‐
                   mands this means just after the last element; for
                   other commands it means the last element.

       @x,y        Indicates  the  element  that covers the point in
                   the listbox window specified by x and y (in pixel
                   coordinates).   If  no element covers that point,
                   then the closest element to that point is used.

       In the widget command  descriptions  below,  arguments  named
       index,  first, and last always contain text indices in one of
       the above forms.

WIDGET COMMAND
       The listbox command creates a new Tk command  whose  name  is
       pathName.   This command may be used to invoke various opera‐
       tions on the widget.  It has the following general form:
              pathName option ?arg arg ...?
       Option and the args determine the exact behaviour of the com‐
       mand.   The  following commands are possible for listbox wid‐
       gets:

       pathName activate index
              Sets the active element to the one indicated by index.
              The active element is drawn with an underline when the
              widget has the input  focus,  and  its  index  may  be
              retrieved with the index active.

       pathName cget option
              Returns  the current value of the configuration option
              given by option.  Option may have any  of  the  values
              accepted by the listbox command.

       pathName configure ?option? ?value option value ...?
              Query  or modify the configuration options of the wid‐
              get.  If no option is specified, returns a list of all
              of the available options for pathName.  If one or more
              option-value pairs are  specified,  then  the  command
              modifies  the given widget option(s) to have the given
              value(s);  in this case the command returns  an  empty
              string.  Option may have any of the values accepted by
              the listbox command.

       pathName curselection
              Returns a list containing the numerical indices of all
              of  the  elements  in  the  listbox that are currently
              selected.  If there are no elements  selected  in  the
              listbox then an empty string is returned.

       pathName delete first ?last?
              Deletes  one  or  more elements of the listbox.  First
              and last are indices specifying  the  first  and  last
              elements in the range to delete.  If last isn't speci‐
              fied it defaults to first, i.e. a  single  element  is
              deleted.

       pathName get first ?last?
              If  last is omitted, returns the contents of the list‐
              box element indicated by first.  If last is specified,
              the  command  returns a list whose elements are all of
              the listbox elements between first  and  last,  inclu‐
              sive.   Both  first and last may have any of the stan‐
              dard forms for indices.

       pathName index index
              Returns a decimal  string  giving  the  integer  index
              value that corresponds to index.

       pathName insert index ?element element ...?
              Inserts  zero  or  more  new elements in the list just
              before the element given by index.  If index is speci‐
              fied as end then the new elements are added to the end
              of the list.  Returns an empty string.

       pathName nearest y
              Given a y-coordinate within the listbox  window,  this
              command  returns  the  index  of the (visible) listbox
              element nearest to that y-coordinate.

       pathName see index
              Adjust the view in the listbox  so  that  the  element
              given  by index is visible.  If the element is already
              visible then the command has no effect; if the element
              is  near  one  edge  of  the  window  then the listbox
              scrolls to bring the element into view  at  the  edge;
              otherwise the listbox scrolls to center the element.

       pathName selection option arg
              This  command is used to adjust the selection within a
              listbox.  It has several forms, depending on option:

              pathName selection anchor index
                     Sets the selection anchor to the element  given
                     by  index.   The selection anchor is the end of
                     the selection that is fixed while dragging  out
                     a  selection  with the mouse.  The index anchor
                     may be used to refer to the anchor element.

              pathName selection clear first ?last?
                     If any of the elements between first  and  last
                     (inclusive)  are selected, they are deselected.
                     The selection state is not changed for elements
                     outside this range.

              pathName selection includes index
                     Returns  1 if the element indicated by index is
                     currently selected, 0 if it isn't.

              pathName selection set first ?last?
                     Selects  all  of  the  elements  in  the  range
                     between  first  and  last,  inclusive,  without
                     affecting the selection state of elements  out‐
                     side that range.

       pathName size
              Returns  a  decimal string indicating the total number
              of elements in the listbox.

       pathName xview args
              This command is used to query and change the  horizon‐
              tal  position  of the information in the widget's win‐
              dow.  It can take any of the following forms:

              pathName xview
                     Returns a list containing two  elements.   Each
                     element  is  a  real  fraction between 0 and 1;
                     together they describe the horizontal span that
                     is  visible in the window.  For example, if the
                     first element is .2 and the second  element  is
                     .6,  20% of the listbox's text is off-screen to
                     the left, the middle 40% is visible in the win‐
                     dow,  and  40% of the text is off-screen to the
                     right.  These are the  same  values  passed  to
                     scrollbars via the -xscrollcommand option.

              pathName xview index
                     Adjusts  the  view  in  the  window so that the
                     character position given by index is  displayed
                     at  the  left  edge  of  the window.  Character
                     positions are defined by the width of the char‐
                     acter 0.

              pathName xview moveto fraction
                     Adjusts the view in the window so that fraction
                     of the total width of the listbox text is  off-
                     screen  to  the left.  fraction must be a frac‐
                     tion between 0 and 1.

              pathName xview scroll number what
                     This command shifts the view in the window left
                     or  right according to number and what.  Number
                     must be an integer.  What must be either  units
                     or  pages.   If what is units, the view adjusts
                     left or right by number  character  units  (the
                     width  of  the 0 character) on the display;  if
                     it is pages then the  view  adjusts  by  number
                     screenfuls.  If number is negative then charac‐
                     ters farther to the left become visible;  if it
                     is  positive  then  characters  farther  to the
                     right become visible.

       pathName yview ?args?
              This command is used to query and change the  vertical
              position  of  the text in the widget's window.  It can
              take any of the following forms:

              pathName yview
                     Returns a list containing two elements, both of
                     which  are real fractions between 0 and 1.  The
                     first element gives the position of the listbox
                     element  at  the top of the window, relative to
                     the listbox as a whole (0.5 means it is halfway
                     through  the listbox, for example).  The second
                     element gives the position of the listbox  ele‐
                     ment  just  after  the  last one in the window,
                     relative to the listbox as a whole.  These  are
                     the  same  values  passed to scrollbars via the
                     -yscrollcommand option.

              pathName yview index
                     Adjusts the view in the window so that the ele‐
                     ment  given by index is displayed at the top of
                     the window.

              pathName yview moveto fraction
                     Adjusts the view in the window so that the ele‐
                     ment  given  by  fraction appears at the top of
                     the window.  Fraction is a fraction  between  0
                     and  1;   0  indicates the first element in the
                     listbox, 0.33 indicates the  element  one-third
                     the way through the listbox, and so on.

              pathName yview scroll number what
                     This  command adjusts the view in the window up
                     or down according to number and  what.   Number
                     must  be an integer.  What must be either units
                     or pages.  If what is units, the  view  adjusts
                     up  or  down  by  number lines;  if it is pages
                     then the view adjusts by number screenfuls.  If
                     number is negative then earlier elements become
                     visible;  if it is positive then later elements
                     become visible.

DEFAULT BINDINGS
       If  the  selection mode is single or browse, at most one ele‐
       ment can be selected in the listbox at once.  In both  modes,
       clicking  button 1 on an element selects it and deselects any
       other selected item.  In browse mode it is also  possible  to
       drag the selection with button 1.

       If  the selection mode is multiple or extended, any number of
       elements may be selected  at  once,  including  discontiguous
       ranges.   In  multiple  mode, clicking button 1 on an element
       toggles its selection state without affecting any other  ele‐
       ments.   In  extended  mode,  pressing button 1 on an element
       selects it, deselects everything else, and sets the anchor to
       the  element under the mouse;  dragging the mouse with button
       1 down extends the selection  to  include  all  the  elements
       between  the  anchor  and the element under the mouse, inclu‐
       sive.

       Most people will probably want to use browse mode for  single
       selections  and  extended  mode  for multiple selections; the
       other modes appear to be useful only in special situations.

       The behaviour of listboxes can be  changed  by  defining  new
       bindings  for  individual  widgets. The default bindings do a
       grab set when button 1 is pressed and  a  grab  release  when
       button  1  is  released.  Care  must be taken when overriding
       either or both of these defaults to ensure that  grabbing  is
       consistent.

BUGS
       At  least  one  entry  is required for the widget to indicate
       that it has keyboard focus.

SEE ALSO
       options(9), types(9)

                                                          LISTBOX(9)
