= scale: Create and manipulate scale widgets

    scale pathName ?options?

== standard OPTIONS
-activebackground -font               -orient
-background       -foreground         -relief
-borderwidth      -highlightcolor     -takefocus
-disabledcolor    -highlightthickness

== widget-SPECIFIC OPTIONS
-bigincrement dist
       Some  interactions  with  the scale cause its value to
       change by ``large'' increments;  this option specifies
       the  size of the large increments.  If specified as 0,
       the large increments default to 1/10 the range of  the
       scale.

-command command
       Specifies  the  prefix of a Tk command to invoke when‐
       ever the scale's value is changed via  a  widget  com‐
       mand.  The actual command consists of this option fol‐
       lowed by a space and a real number indicating the  new
       value of the scale.

-from frac
       A  real  value corresponding to the left or top end of
       the scale.

-height dist
       Specifies a desired height for  the  scale.   If  this
       option  isn't  specified, the scale is given a default
       height.

-label string
       A string to display as a label for the scale.  If  the
       option  is  specified  as an empty string, no label is
       displayed.

-resolution frac
       A real value specifying the resolution for the  scale.
       If  this  value  is greater than zero then the scale's
       value will always be rounded to an  even  multiple  of
       this  value,  as  will tick marks and the endpoints of
       the scale.  If the value is less  than  zero  then  no
       rounding  occurs.  Defaults to 1 (i.e., the value will
       be integral).

-showvalue boolean
       Specifies a boolean value indicating  whether  or  not
       the current value of the scale is to be displayed.

-sliderlength dist
       Specfies  the  size  of  the slider along the slider's
       long dimension..

-sliderrelief relief
       Specifies the relief to use when drawing the slider.

-state state
       Specifies one of three states for the scale:   normal,
       active,  or  disabled.   If the scale is disabled then
       the value may not be changed and the scale won't acti‐
       vate.  If the scale is active, the slider is displayed
       using the colour  specified  by  the  activebackground
       option.

-tickinterval frac
       Must  be a real value.  Determines the spacing between
       numerical tick marks displayed below or to the left of
       the slider.  If 0, no tick marks will be displayed.

-to frac
       Specifies  a  real value corresponding to the right or
       bottom end of the scale.  This  value  may  be  either
       less than or greater than the from option.

-width dist
       Specifies  a  desired  width  for  the scale.  If this
       option isn't specified, the scale is given  a  default
       width.

The scale command creates a new window (given by the pathName
argument) and makes  it  into  a  scale  widget.   Additional
options,  described  above,  may  be specified on the command
line to configure aspects of the scale such as  its  colours,
orientation, and relief.  The scale command returns its path‐
Name argument.  At the time this command  is  invoked,  there
must not exist a window named pathName.

A  scale is a widget that displays a rectangular trough and a
small slider.  The trough corresponds to a range of real val‐
ues (determined by the from, to, and resolution options), and
the position of the slider selects a particular  real  value.
The  slider's  position  (and hence the scale's value) may be
adjusted with the mouse or keyboard as described in the BIND‐
INGS section below.  Whenever the scale's value is changed, a
Tk command is invoked (using the command  option)  to  notify
other interested widgets of the change.

Three  annotations  may  be  displayed  in a scale widget:  a
label appearing at the top right of the widget (top left  for
horizontal  scales),  a  number displayed just to the left of
the slider (just above the slider for horizontal scales), and
a collection of numerical tick marks just to the right of the
trough (just below the trough for horizontal  scales).   Each
of  these  three annotations may be enabled or disabled using
the configuration options.

== widget COMMAND
The scale command creates a new  Tk  command  whose  name  is
pathName.   This command may be used to invoke various opera‐
tions on the widget.  It has the following general form:
       pathName option ?arg arg ...?
Option and the args determine the exact behaviour of the com‐
mand.  The following commands are possible for scale widgets:

pathName cget option
       Returns  the current value of the configuration option
       given by option.  Option may have any  of  the  values
       accepted by the scale command.

pathName configure ?option? ?value option value ...?
       Query  or modify the configuration options of the wid‐
       get.  If no option is specified, returns a list of all
       of the available options for pathName.  If one or more
       option-value pairs are  specified,  then  the  command
       modifies  the given widget option(s) to have the given
       value(s);  in this case the command returns  an  empty
       string.  Option may have any of the values accepted by
       the scale command.

pathName coords ?value?
       Returns a list whose elements are the x and y  coordi‐
       nates  of the point along the centreline of the trough
       that corresponds to value.  If value is  omitted  then
       the scale's current value is used.

pathName get ?x y?
       If  x  and y are omitted, returns the current value of
       the scale.  If x and y are specified, they give  pixel
       coordinates  within  the  widget;  the command returns
       the scale value  corresponding  to  the  given  pixel.
       Only  one  of x or y is used:  for horizontal scales y
       is ignored, and for vertical scales x is ignored.

pathName identify x y
       Returns a string indicating what  part  of  the  scale
       lies under the coordinates given by x and y.  A return
       value of slider means  that  the  point  is  over  the
       slider;  trough1 means that the point is over the por‐
       tion of the slider  above   or  to  the  left  of  the
       slider;  and  trough2 means that the point is over the
       portion of the slider below or to  the  right  of  the
       slider.   If  the  point  isn't over one of these ele‐
       ments, an empty string is returned.

pathName set value
       This command is invoked to change the current value of
       the  scale, and hence the position at which the slider
       is displayed.  Value  gives  the  new  value  for  the
       scale.  The command has no effect if the scale is dis‐
       abled.

== bindings
Tk automatically creates bindings for scales that  give  them
the following default behaviour.  Where the behaviour is dif‐
ferent for vertical and horizontal scales, the horizontal be‐
haviour is described in parentheses.

[1]    If  button  1  is  pressed  in the trough, the scale's
       value will be incremented or decremented by the  value
       of the bigincrement option so that the slider moves in
       the direction of the cursor.  If the  button  is  held
       down, the action auto-repeats.

[2]    If button 1 is pressed over the slider, the slider can
       be dragged with the mouse.

[3]    If the widget  receives  Up-arrow  or  Left-arrow  key
       events,  the  scale's  value  will  be  incremented or
       decremented so as to  adjust  the  value  towards  the
       fromvalue.

[4]    If  the  widget receives Down-arrow or Right-arrow key
       events, the  scale's  value  will  be  incremented  or
       decremented  so  as  to  adjust  the value towards the
       tovalue.

If the scale is disabled using the state option then none  of
the above bindings have any effect.

The  behaviour of scales can be changed by defining new bind‐
ings for individual widgets.

== see ALSO
options(9), types(9)

