TYPES(9)              Kernel Developer's Manual             TYPES(9)

NAME
       types - Standard types required by widget options.

DESCRIPTION
       This  manual  entry describes the the standard types that can
       be given as arguments to Inferno Tk widget options.  When  an
       option is documented, the type of argument that it accepts is
       either documented there, or the name of the  argument  refers
       to one of the names documented below.

       anchorPos
              One  of the values n, ne, e, se, s, sw, w, nw, or cen‐
              ter.  See -anchor in options(9).

       boolean
              A true or false value, one of the  following:  0,  no,
              off, false (false), 1, yes, on, true (true).

       bitmap Identifies  an  image which can be drawn, or used as a
              mask through which something else is drawn. If  bitmap
              begins  with  a  `@', the remaining characters must be
              the path name of an  Inferno  image  file.  If  bitmap
              begins  with  the character `<', the remaining charac‐
              ters  must  be  a  decimal  integer  giving  the  file
              descriptor  number  of  an open file (see sys-open(2))
              from which the bitmap can be loaded. Otherwise, bitmap
              should  be  the name of a bitmap file in the directory
              /icons/tk.

       color  A color parameter can be a colour name or an RGB (red,
              green and blue luminance) value. The colour names rec‐
              ognized are:
                  aqua     yellow   red      teal     white
                  fuchsia  black    blue     darkblue transparent
                  maroon   gray     green    lime
                  purple   navy     olive    orange
              For RGB values, either #rgb or #rrggbb  can  be  used,
              where  r, rr, etc. are hexadecimal values for the cor‐
              responding colour components.  The notation  #rrggbbaa
              can  be  used  to describe a colour with alpha (trans‐
              parency) component aa;  the  rr,  gg,  and  bb  values
              should  be  pre-multiplied  appropriately. This is the
              canonical  form  for  colour  values.   Alternatively,
              transparency  can be applied to any other colour using
              a suffix *alpha where alpha is  either  #aa  (two  hex
              digits  representing an alpha value between 0 and 255)
              or f (a decimal fixed point number between 0  and  1).
              For  example,  red*0.5  gives  half  transparent  red;
              #007f007f*#7f gives 0.75  transparent  green  (canoni‐
              cally #003f003f).

       dist   Dist  specifies  a distance on the screen, in the fol‐
              lowing form: an optional minus sign (-), then  one  or
              more  decimal  digits  (with possible embedded decimal
              point), then an optional  units  specifier.  The  unit
              specifiers are the following:

              c      centimetres

              m      millimetres

              i      inches

              p      points (1/72th inch)

              h      height of widget's font (only applicable if the
                     widget has an associated font, and if the  font
                     has previously been set).

              w      width  of  the  zero  (0) character in widget's
                     font. (see above).

              Measurements are converted into  pixels  assuming  100
              dots
                     per inch on an average CRT display.

       font   A  font  parameter  gives  the  full  path  name of an
              Inferno  font  file;  for  example,   /sys/font/pelm/uni‐
              code.9.font.

       frac   A numeric, possibly fractional, value.

       relief One  of  raised,  sunken,  flat, ridge, or groove. See
              -relief in options(9).

SEE ALSO
       intro(9), options(9)

                                                            TYPES(9)
