DIALOG(2)                System Calls Manual               DIALOG(2)

NAME
       dialog: prompt, getstring - basic dialog boxes

SYNOPSIS
       include "dialog.m";
       dialog := load Dialog Dialog->PATH;

       init:        fn();
       prompt:      fn(ctxt: ref Draw->Context, p: ref Draw->Image,
                      icon, title, msg: string,
                      dflt: int, labs: list of string): int;
       getstring:   fn(ctxt: ref Draw->Context, p: ref Draw->Image,
                      s: string): string;

DESCRIPTION
       Dialog  module  provides  two  simple dialog boxes for use by
       wm(1) applications.  Init should be called once to initialise
       its internal state.

       Prompt  uses the graphics context ctxt to pop up a dialog box
       to prompt the user to choose from a set of  alternatives,  or
       to acknowledge a message.  The box is created near the north‐
       west corner of the parent window p, represented by  the  win‐
       dow's  image.   (If the parent window is a Tk Toplevel t, for
       instance, the appropriate value is t.image.)  If  p  is  nil,
       the  box  is  centred  on  the screen.  The box has the given
       title and an optional icon.  It displays the given msg and  a
       number  of  buttons,  labelled with the strings in labs.  The
       dialog box waits for the user to  push  a  button,  and  then
       returns  the index of the button pushed (the first element of
       labs is index 0).  If the user  types  a  newline,  the  dflt
       value  is  returned.   The button with the dflt index is spe‐
       cially outlined in the dialog box.

       Getstring pops up a dialog box near the parent window p.  The
       box  contains  the msg and an entry widget.  It waits for the
       user to type a string and a newline,  and  then  returns  the
       typed string, without the newline.

SOURCE
       /appl/lib/dialog.b

SEE ALSO
       draw-context(2), tk(2), wmlib(2)

                                                           DIALOG(2)
