KEYRING-GETMSG(2)        System Calls Manual       KEYRING-GETMSG(2)

NAME
       keyring:  getmsg, sendmsg, senderrmsg - send and receive mes‐
       sages on undelimited streams

SYNOPSIS
       include "keyring.m";
       keyring := load Keyring Keyring->PATH;

       getmsg:  fn(fd: ref Sys->FD): array of byte;
       sendmsg: fn(fd: ref Sys->FD, buf: array of byte, n: int): int;
       senderrmsg: fn(fd: ref Sys->FD, s: string): int;

DESCRIPTION
       These functions allow arbitrary data, packed into  arrays  of
       bytes,  to  be exchanged on network connections using connec‐
       tion-oriented transport protocols that do not preserve record
       boundaries  (eg,  TCP/IP  without  ssl(3)).  They are used to
       implement   various   authentication   protocols,   including
       auth(6), as implemented by keyring-auth(2).

       Each data message is transmitted with a five-byte header con‐
       taining a four-character zero-padded decimal count  n  termi‐
       nated  by a newline, followed by n bytes of message data.  An
       error message has a similar structure, except that the  first
       character  of  the  count  is replaced by an exclamation mark
       (!); the  message  data  following  contains  the  diagnostic
       string in its UTF-8 encoding (see utf(6)).

       Getmsg  reads  the  next message from fd and returns its data
       content.

       Sendmsg sends the first n bytes of buf as a  message  on  fd,
       and returns n.

       Senderrmsg sends the error message s.

SOURCE
       /libinterp/keyring.c

DIAGNOSTICS
       Sendmsg  and senderrmsg return -1 if there was an error writ‐
       ing to fd; they set the system error string.  Getmsg  returns
       nil if there was an error reading from fd; it sets the system
       error string to reflect the cause.  It also returns nil if an
       error  message  was  received  instead of a data message; the
       system error string will contain the error message's diagnos‐
       tic.

                                                   KEYRING-GETMSG(2)
