NAMES(2)                 System Calls Manual                NAMES(2)

NAME
       Names:  basename,  cleanname,  dirname,  elements,  isprefix,
       pathname, relative, rooted - file name manipulation

SYNOPSIS
       include "names.m";
       names := load Names Names->PATH;

       basename:  fn(name: string, suffix: string): string;
       cleanname: fn(name: string): string;
       dirname:   fn(name: string): string;
       elements:  fn(name: string): list of string;
       isprefix:  fn(a: string, b: string): int;
       pathname:  fn(els: list of string): string;
       relative:  fn(name: string, root: string): string;
       rooted:    fn(root: string, name: string): string;

DESCRIPTION
       Names provides operations on file names (path names):

       basename
              Return the trailing component of name (the text  after
              the final shorn of suffix (which may be null).

       cleanname
              Return  a  `cleaner'  version  of  name:  there are no
              redundant and trailing slashes,  and  directory  names
              and  have  been  interpreted lexically.  If the result
              would otherwise be  the  empty  string,  the  name  is
              returned instead.

       dirname
              Return  the directory component of name: the string up
              to but not including the final slash(es).

       elements
              Return a list of the path elements of name: the  words
              between  slashes.   If  name starts with a the head of
              the list will be the string "/" but otherwise  slashes
              do not appear.

       pathname
              Return  a  path name formed from a list of elements as
              produced by elements.

       isprefix
              Return true iff path name a is a prefix of  path  name
              b.

       relative
              If  name  is  root/X  for  some X, return X; otherwise
              return name unchanged.

       rooted Return the path name for name relative to a given root
              directory  (either  name  may be nil).  If name itself
              starts with or the result is  name;  otherwise  it  is
              root/name.

       See  sys-intro(2)  for  details  of  file name syntax and its
       interpretation.

SOURCE
       /appl/lib/names.b

SEE ALSO
       sys-intro(2), sys-fd2path(2), workdir(2)

                                                            NAMES(2)
