POP3(2)                  System Calls Manual                 POP3(2)

NAME
       pop3 - Post Office Protocol

SYNOPSIS
       include "pop3.m";
       pop3 := load Pop3 Pop3->PATH;

       open:       fn(user, password, server: string): (int, string);
       stat:       fn(): (int, string, int, int);
       msglist:    fn(): (int, string, list of (int, int));
       msgnolist:  fn(): (int, string, list of int);
       top:        fn(m: int): (int, string, string);
       get:        fn(m: int): (int, string, string);
       delete:     fn(m: int): (int, string);
       close:      fn(): (int, string);

DESCRIPTION
       Pop3  provides  an interface to the Post Office Protocol POP3
       through a set of functions.

       Open opens a connection to a POP3 server, logging in  as  the
       specified  user  with  the given password.  If server is nil,
       open uses $pop3,  which  must  be  defined  in  ndb(6).   The
       remaining functions assume a successfully opened connection.

       Stat  returns  the  status  of the user's mailbox.  The third
       element of its return tuple is the number of messages and the
       fourth is the total number of bytes in the messages.

       Msglist  lists  the  user's mailbox. The third element in its
       return tuple gives a list  of  pairs  of  numbers  comprising
       (message number, bytes in message).

       Msgnolist  lists  the  user's  mailbox as above but omits the
       bytes in each message.

       Top returns the top of message m.

       Get returns the full text of message m.

       Delete deletes message m.

       Close closes the connection to the POP3  server.   Note  that
       subsequent  reconnections to the server may renumber the mes‐
       sages in the mail box and will certainly do so  if  the  last
       connection deleted messages.

       Note  also that a connection is static in the sense that mail
       messages entering the server during a connection will not  be
       accessible.  A  reconnection  is  needed to see newly arrived
       messages.

SOURCE
       /appl/lib/pop3.b

SEE ALSO
       acme(1)

DIAGNOSTICS
       All these functions return -1 and an error message on failure
       as the first two entries in their return tuples.

                                                             POP3(2)
