PREFAB-INTRO(2)          System Calls Manual         PREFAB-INTRO(2)

NAME
       Prefab: intro - Interactive TV tookit

SYNOPSIS
       include "draw.m";
       include "prefab.m";
       prefab := load Prefab Prefab->PATH;

DESCRIPTION
       The  Prefab  module contains components for building graphics
       objects suitable for Interactive  Television  (ITV)  applica‐
       tions  using  infrared  remote controls.  Using the Draw mod‐
       ule's operations  for  simple  text  and  images  (see  draw-
       intro(2)),  the  toolkit  can  group  individual items, treat
       those groups as units, and then activate the  items  on  com‐
       mand.   The  other  user  interface  toolkit, tk(2), provides
       facilities for keyboard- and mouse-driven applications.

       The objects on the screen are of type Compound, each of which
       occupies  a unique window on the display and contains objects
       of type Element.  An Element may be a single object or a list
       of  further Elements, to build hierarchically structured com‐
       ponents.

       Prefab defines Environ  and  Style  types  that  specify  the
       appearance of objects: their colours, fonts, backgrounds, and
       so on.  A Style gives font and colour information,  while  an
       Environ  identifies  the  Screen upon which the items will be
       displayed and the Style in which they will be drawn.

       Applications should  allocate  Elements  and  Compounds  only
       through the appropriate member functions, as described in the
       corresponding sections of the  manual.   Items  created  with
       regular  Limbo definitions will not work properly.  Moreover,
       except where indicated, applications should  not  modify  the
       data  members  directly.   Although the type definitions make
       data members visible, the members should usually  be  treated
       as read-only data.

SOURCE
       /libinterp/prefab.c
       /libprefab/*.c

SEE ALSO
       draw-intro(2), ir(2)

                                                     PREFAB-INTRO(2)
