PROF(3)               Library Functions Manual               PROF(3)

NAME
       prof - profiling device

SYNOPSIS
       bind #P /prof

       /prof/ctl
       /prof/n/name
       /prof/n/path
       /prof/n/histogram
       /prof/n/pctl

DESCRIPTION
       The  prof  device serves a two-level directory structure. The
       first level contains a control file ctl and zero or more num‐
       bered  directories  each corresponding to a module being pro‐
       filed. Inside each of these numbered directories are  further
       files which describe the particular module being profiled.

       The  write-only  control  file ctl provides the facilities to
       profile a module. Messages written to this file initiate  and
       control the profiling.

       module name
                 Add  the module or the module whose path is name to
                 the list of modules to be profiled.

       start     Start profiling all modules in the above  list  or,
                 if  the  list is empty, start profiling all modules
                 loaded by the kernel. The profiling is done by sam‐
                 pling.

       startcp   As  above  but  do coverage profiling. All instruc‐
                 tions executed in the wanted modules are counted.

       startmp   As above but do memory profiling. All  heap  memory
                 allocations  are  associated  with  a line of limbo
                 source and all deallocations with the line that did
                 the allocation.

       stop      Stop all profiling.

       end       Stop  all  profiling and free all memory associated
                 with the  modules  being  profiled.   The  profiler
                 returns to it's initial state with no modules under
                 profile.

       interval i
                 Change the sampling interval to i ms.  The  default
                 sampling rate is 100 ms.

       The  second  level directories contain information about each
       module under profile.

       The read-only file name contains the name of  the  module  in
       the form it appears in it's module source file.

       The  read-only  file  path  contains the path of the dis file
       that implements the module.

       The write-only control file pctl allows finer control of  the
       profiling of a module. It is not used at present.

       The  read-only  file  histogram contains statistics about the
       profiled module. The file contains a list of pairs  of  inte‐
       gers  seperated by a space. The first number of the pair is a
       program counter value  representing  the  address  of  a  dis
       instruction.  Addresses start from 0 and the list is in order
       of increasing address. The second  number  is  the  frequency
       with  which  this address was sampled. Each read of this file
       returns the next pair in the list. The frequency  is  guaran‐
       teed to be non-zero.

       When coverage profiling the second number of each pair is the
       number of times that dis instruction was executed, when  mem‐
       ory profiling it's the amount of memory in bytes.

SOURCE
       /emu/port/devprof.c

BUGS
       The  device profiles on a global basis and therefore does not
       distinguish between multiple profilers running at once.

       The coverage profiling can only be done on dis instructions.

       The device can do only one of time, coverage or  memory  pro‐
       filing at once.

                                                             PROF(3)
