VGA(3)                Library Functions Manual                VGA(3)

NAME
       vga - VGA controller device

SYNOPSIS
       bind #v /dev

       /dev/vgactl
       /dev/vgaovlctl
       /dev/vgaovl

DESCRIPTION
       The  VGA device allows configuration of a graphics controller
       on a PC (and any other platform with  VGA  devices).   Vgactl
       allows  control  over  higher-level  settings such as display
       height, width, depth, controller  and  hardware-cursor  type.
       Along  with the I/O-port registers provided by arch(3), it is
       used to implement configuration and setup of  VGA  controller
       cards.

       Writing  strings  to  vgactl  configures the VGA device.  The
       following are valid commands.

       size XxYxZ chan
              Set the size of the screen image to be X  pixels  wide
              and  Y pixels high.  Each pixel is Z bits as specified
              by chan, whose format is described in image(6).

       actualsize XxY
              Set the physical size of the display to  be  X  pixels
              wide  by  Y pixels high.  This message is optional; it
              is used to implement panning and to  accommodate  dis‐
              plays  that require the in-memory screen image to have
              certain  alignment   properties.    For   example,   a
              1400x1050 screen with a 1408x1050 in-memory image will
              use size 1408x1050 but actualsize 1400x1050.

       panning mode
              Depending on whether mode is on or off, enable or dis‐
              able  panning  in  a virtual screen.  If panning is on
              and the screen's size is larger than  its  actualsize,
              the displayed portion of the screen will pan to follow
              the mouse.  Setting the panning mode after  the  first
              attach of the #i driver has no effect.

       type ctlr
              Set  the  type  of VGA controller being used.  Ctlr is
              one  of   ark200pv,   clgd542x,   clgd546x,   ct65545,
              cyber938x, hiqvideo, mach64xx, mga2164w, neomagic, s3,
              and t2r4.

              Note that this list does not indicate the full set  of
              VGA  chips  supported.  For  example,  s3 includes the
              86C801/5, 86C928, Vision864, and Vision964.  It is the
              job of a user-level program to recognise which partic‐
              ular chip is being used and to initialize it appropri‐
              ately.

       hwgc gc
              Set  the  type of hardware graphics cursor being used.
              Gc is one of  ark200pvhwgc,  bt485hwgc,  clgd542xhwgc,
              clgd546xhwgc,  ct65545hwgc,  cyber938xhwgc,  hiqvideo‐
              hwgc,   mach64xxhwgc,   mga2164whwgc,    neomagichwgc,
              rgb524hwgc,   s3hwgc,   t2r4hwgc,   tvp3020hwgc,   and
              tvp3026hwgc.  A value  of  off  disables  the  cursor.
              There is no software cursor.

       palettedepth d
              Set  the  number  of bits of precision used by the VGA
              palette to d, which must be either 6 or 8.

       blank  Blank the screen.  This consists of setting the  hard‐
              ware  color  map to all black as well as, on some con‐
              trollers, setting the VGA hsync and vsync  signals  so
              as  to  turn  off  VESA  DPMS-compliant monitors.  The
              screen also blanks after  30  minutes  of  inactivity.
              The screen can be unblanked by moving the mouse.

       blanktime minutes
              Set  the timeout before the screen blanks; the default
              is 30 minutes.  If minutes is zero, blanking  is  dis‐
              abled.

       hwaccel mode
              Depending on whether mode is on or off, enable or dis‐
              able whether hardware acceleration (currently for rec‐
              tangle  filling  and  moving)  used  by  the  graphics
              engine.  The default setting is on.

       hwblank mode
              Depending on whether mode is on or off, enable or dis‐
              able the use of DPMS blanking (see blank above).

       linear size align
              Use  a  linear screen aperture of size size aligned on
              an align-byte boundary.

       drawinit
              Initialize the graphics hardware.  This must  be  sent
              after setting the type.

       Reading vgactl returns the current settings, one per line.

       Some  VGA cards support overlay graphics.  Writing strings to
       vgaovlctl configures such cards.   The  following  are  valid
       overlay control commands:

       openctl
              opens the overlay device.

       configure w h format
              allocates  resources  inside  the driver to support an
              overlay area of width w and  height  h  pixels.   Cur‐
              rently,  the only supported format is YUYV packed.  In
              YUYV two pixels are encoded by their separate Y values
              and  their  combined  U and V values.  The size of the
              two pixels is 32 bits.

       enable x y w h
              enables drawing data on the display through the  over‐
              lay mode.  The data is drawn at position x,y and has a
              width and height of w,h respectively.

       closectl
              terminates overlay control.

       Overlay data can be written to vgaovl.

EXAMPLES
       The following disables hardware acceleration.

              echo hwaccel off > /dev/vgactl

SOURCE
       /os/pc/devvga.c

SEE ALSO
       arch(3)

BUGS
       The hardware graphics cursor on the et4000 does not  work  in
       2x8-bit mode.

                                                              VGA(3)
