VID(3)                Library Functions Manual                VID(3)

NAME
       vid - Motorola 823 video output

SYNOPSIS
       bind -b #v /dev

       /dev/viddata
       /dev/vidctl
       /dev/vidcram

DESCRIPTION
       The  vid  device  serves two files giving basic access to the
       on-chip video output of the Motorola 823.  It assumes a video
       hardware  configuration  exactly  like  that  of  the 823FADS
       board, with an I²C interface to an off-chip ADV7176  NTSC/PAL
       converter at I²C address 0x54.

       The control device vidctl accepts the following commands:

       on     Disable  LCD panel (if present) and enable output from
              the video frame buffer.

       off    Stop display from the video frame buffer and re-enable
              the LCD panel (if present).

       mode m Set  the  video  output  format to m, which is one of:
              ntsc, pal-i, pal-m or pal-n.   This  command  is  only
              effective   when  video  output  is  off.   When  next
              switched on, the both the  video  controller  RAM  and
              ADV7176 are reprogrammed to the new format.

       Video data can be written to the video frame buffer by writes
       of the viddata file.  The file offset  selects  the  starting
       byte within the frame buffer.  Reads return the corresponding
       data from the frame buffer.  The application  is  responsible
       for  formatting the data as the 823's video encoder requires,
       for the selected video format.

       The file vidcram gives read and write access to the  contents
       of the video control RAM.  The file offset addresses bytes in
       the RAM; values can be read from or written  to  the  RAM  in
       groups of 4-byte big-endian words.

SOURCE
       /os/mpc/devvid.c

BUGS
       Square  pixel mode cannot be used on the FADS board: no suit‐
       able video clock source is available.

                               MPC823                         VID(3)
