MAN(6)                      Games Manual                      MAN(6)

NAME
       man - manual page format

DESCRIPTION
       The Inferno manual pages are stored as text files in a format
       originally defined for use with the Unix  and  Plan  9  troff
       command,  when  used  with  the  man  macro  package.  Within
       Inferno, the format is interpreted by the programs of man(1).

       Except in and requests, any text argument denoted  t  in  the
       request summary may be zero to six words.  Quotes " ... " may
       be used to include blanks in a `word'.  If t  is  empty,  the
       special treatment is applied to the next text input line (the
       next line that doesn't begin with dot).   In  this  way,  for
       example,  .I  may  be used to italicize a line of more than 6
       words, or .SM followed by .B to make small letters in  `bold'
       font.

       A prevailing indent distance is remembered between successive
       indented paragraphs, and  is  reset  to  default  value  upon
       reaching a non-indented paragraph.  Default units for indents
       i are ens.

       The fonts are

       R      roman, the main font, preferred for diagnostics
       I      italic, preferred for parameters, short names of  com‐
              mands, names of manual pages, and naked function names
       B      `bold',  actually  the  constant width font, preferred
              for  examples,  file  names,  declarations,  keywords,
              names  of  struct  members,  and literals (numbers are
              rarely literals)
       L      also the constant width font.  For  graphical  display
              and  printing,  L=B; when converted to plain text, the
              arguments of the macros .L, .LR, and .RL  are  printed
              in  quotes;  preferred  only  where quotes really help
              (e.g. lower-case literals and punctuation).

       Type font and size are reset to default  values  before  each
       paragraph, and after processing font- or size-setting macros.

       The  man  format  admits equations and tables in the style of
       Unix eqn (equation setting) and tbl (table layout) preproces‐
       sors, but do not support arguments on .EQ and .TS macros.

       These strings are predefined by man:

       \*R    Trademark symbol
       \*S    Change to default type size.

FILES
       /man/*/*
              Source files of manual pages.

SEE ALSO
       man(1)

REQUESTS
                         Request   Cause If        no    Explanation
                                   Break Argument                 .B
                         t      no    t=n.t.l.*Text   t  is  `bold'.
                         .BI  t   no    t=n.t.l. Join  words  of   t
                         alternating    bold    and   italic.    .BR
                         t     no    t=n.t.l. Join words of t alter‐
                         nating        bold        and        Roman.
                         .DT       no             Restore    default
                         tabs.    .EE       yes            End  dis‐
                         played                              example
                         .EX       yes            Begin    displayed
                         example .HP  i     yes   i=p.i.*  Set  pre‐
                         vailing  indent to i.  Begin paragraph with
                         hanging             indent.              .I
                         t      no    t=n.t.l. Text   t  is  italic.
                         .IB  t   no    t=n.t.l. Join  words  of   t
                         alternating   italic   and   bold.   .IP  x
                         i   yes   x=""     Same as .TP with tag  x.
                         .IR  t      no    t=n.t.l. Join  words of t
                         alternating   italic   and    Roman.     .L
                         t      no    t=n.t.l. Text  t  is  literal.
                         .LP       yes            Same as .PP.   .LR
                         t     no             Join   2  words  of  t
                         alternating   literal   and   Roman.    .PD
                         d     no    d=.4v    Interparagraph    dis‐
                         tance is d.  .PP       yes            Begin
                         paragraph.    Set   prevailing   indent  to
                         default.   .RE       yes            End  of
                         relative  indent.  Set prevailing indent to
                         amount    of     starting     .RS.      .RI
                         t     no    t=n.t.l. Join words of t alter‐
                         nating    Roman    and     italic.      .RL
                         t     no             Join 2 or 3 words of t
                         alternating   Roman   and   literal.    .RS
                         i     yes   i=p.i.   Start relative indent,
                         move left margin in distance i.   Set  pre‐
                         vailing   indent   to  default  for  nested
                         indents.  .SH t     yes   t=""     Subhead;
                         reset      paragraph     distance.      .SM
                         t     no    t=n.t.l. Text t is small.   .SS
                         t     no    t=""     Secondary     subhead.
                         .TF s   yes            Prevailing indent is
                         wide  as string s in font L; paragraph dis‐
                         tance is 0.  .TH n c x yes            Begin
                         page  named n of chapter c; x is extra com‐
                         mentary, e.g. `local', for page head.   Set
                         prevailing indent and tabs to default.  .TP
                         i     yes   i=p.i.   Set prevailing  indent
                         to  i.   Restore  default  indent  if  i=0.
                         Begin indented paragraph with  hanging  tag
                         given  by  next  text line.  If tag doesn't
                         fit,   place   it   on    separate    line.
                         .1C       yes            Equalize   columns
                         and    return    to     1-column     output
                         .2C       yes            Start     2-column
                         nofill output

       * n.t.l. = next text line; p.i. = prevailing indent

BUGS
       There's no way to include literal double  quote  marks  "  in
       font-alternation macros, such as
       There  is no direct way to suppress column widows in 2-column
       output; the column  lengths  may  be  adjusted  by  inserting
       requests before the closing

                                                              MAN(6)
