KEYRING-CERTTOSTR(2)     System Calls Manual    KEYRING-CERTTOSTR(2)

NAME
       keyring:  certtostr,  pktostr,  sktostr,  strtocert, strtopk,
       strtosk - encryption key conversion functions

SYNOPSIS
       include "keyring.m"
       keyring:= load Keyring Keyring->PATH;

       strtocert: fn(s: string)         : ref Certificate;
       certtostr: fn(c: ref Certificate): string;
       strtopk:   fn(s: string)         : ref PK;
       pktostr:   fn(pk: ref PK)        : string;
       strtosk:   fn(s: string)         : ref SK;
       sktostr:   fn(sk: ref SK)        : string;

DESCRIPTION
       Certificates, public keys, and private keys are  passed  over
       networks and between applications using a Unicode representa‐
       tion. This collection of functions provide a means to convert
       adts  supplied  by the system to and from their portable tex‐
       tual representation. These routines  are  typically  used  as
       part of an I/O package for implementing security.

       Strtocert  takes  a string argument containing a user name, a
       hash algorithm, a  certifying  authority  and  an  expiration
       time.  Fields are separated by a newline. The return value is
       a Certificate.  If the string  is  of  improper  format,  the
       result is nil.

       Certtostr  performs the inverse operation: takes the Certifi‐
       cate c and produces a text string suitable for  communication
       over a network.

       Strtopk and strtosk take as their arguments a string s repre‐
       senting the public and private  keys  respectively.   S  must
       contain  an  algorithm  name, a user name and the key. Fields
       are separated by a newline.  Strtopk returns a  reference  to
       the  resulting PK; strtosk returns a reference to the result‐
       ing SK.  If the format of s is invalid, the result is nil.

       Pktostr and sktostr perform the inverse operations: they take
       a public key (secret key) and produce a printable representa‐
       tion as a string.

SOURCE
       /libinterp/keyring.c

                                                KEYRING-CERTTOSTR(2)
