KEYRING-GETSTRING(2)     System Calls Manual    KEYRING-GETSTRING(2)

NAME
       keyring:  getstring,  putstring,  getbytearray, putbytearray,
       puterror - exchange data on delimited streams

SYNOPSIS
       include "keyring.m"
       keyring:= load Keyring Keyring->PATH;

       getstring:    fn(fd: ref Sys->FD): (string, string);
       putstring:    fn(fd: ref Sys->FD, s: string): int;
       getbytearray: fn(fd: ref Sys->FD): (array of byte, string);
       putbytearray: fn(fd: ref Sys->FD, a: array of byte, n: int): int;
       puterror:     fn(fd: ref Sys->FD, s: string): int;

DESCRIPTION
       These functions provide I/O  for  strings,  byte  arrays  and
       error  strings over network connections that provide a record
       structure for communication (as provided for  arbitrary  net‐
       works by ssl(3)).

       Putstring  writes  string  s to fd.  It returns the number of
       bytes written, or -1 if an error occurred.  Messages  written
       by putstring are truncated to 4096 bytes.

       Getstring  reads a string as written by putstring from fd and
       returns a tuple (result,error).   If  successful,  the  error
       string is nil.

       Putbytearray  writes  the array of bytes a to fd.  It returns
       the number of bytes written, or  -1  if  an  error  occurred.
       Messages written by putbytearray are truncated to 4096 bytes.

       Getbytearray reads an array of bytes as written by putbytear‐
       ray from fd and returns a tuple of the  form  (result,error).
       If successful, the error string is nil.

       Puterror  writes  an error string s to fd.  It can be used in
       place of putstring or putbytearray to cause  a  corresponding
       getstring or getbytearray to fail (in the receiving process),
       forcing them to return the error string s.   It  may  not  be
       longer than Sys->ERRMAX bytes.

SOURCE
       /libinterp/keyring.c

DIAGNOSTICS
       The  output  functions return an int which is -1 if there was
       an I/O error, and a non-negative value otherwise.  The  input
       functions  return  a  tuple that includes a string indicating
       the cause of the error, as the second element of the tuple.

                                                KEYRING-GETSTRING(2)
