RABIN(2)                 System Calls Manual                RABIN(2)

NAME
       rabin - rabin fingerprinting

SYNOPSIS
       include "rabin.m";
       rabin := load Rabin Rabin->PATH;
       Rcfg, Rfile: import rabin;

       init:     fn(bufio: Bufio);
       open:     fn(rcfg: ref Rcfg, b: ref Iobuf, min, max: int): (ref Rfile, string);

       Rcfg: adt {
            mk:  fn(prime, width, mod: int): (ref Rcfg, string);
       };

       Rfile: adt {
            read:     fn(r: self ref Rfile): (array of byte, big, string);
       };

DESCRIPTION
       Rabin  implements a data fingerprinting algorithm.  A rolling
       checksum is calculated while reading data.  Certain  checksum
       values  are taken to be data boundaries and used to split the
       data into chunks.

       Rcfg represents the parameters to the algorithm; Rcfg.mk cre‐
       ates  a new instance.  Prime should be a prime number.  Width
       is the width of the rolling  checksum  window  in  bytes.   A
       wider  window  results  in more diverse boundary patterns.  A
       window of 30 bytes should be reasonable for most  uses.   Mod
       effectively  sets  the  mean desired chunk size.  The rolling
       checksum is calculated  modulo  mod.   All  three  parameters
       influence where chunk boundaries will be found.

       Rfile represents a file to read chunks from.  Open returns an
       initialised Rfile or an error string.  Min and  max  are  the
       minimum  and  maximum  size  in  bytes of chunks that will be
       returned.  Only the last chunk in a file can be smaller  than
       the minimum chunk size.  Note that the mean chunk size may be
       off due to these parameters.  Data  is  read  from  Iobuf  b.
       Rfile.read  returns  subsequent  chunks  of data and the file
       offset at which they were found, or an error message.   After
       end of file, the returned chunks are zero bytes long.

SOURCE
       /appl/lib/rabin.b

AUTHOR
       Mechiel Lukkien, during GSoC 2007

                                                            RABIN(2)
