= iar: archive and library maintainer

    iar key [ posname ] afile [ file ...  ]

Iar  maintains groups of files combined into a single archive
file, afile.  The main use of iar is  to  create  and  update
library files for the loaders 2l(10.1), etc.  It can be used,
though, for any similar purpose.

Key is one character from the set  drqtpmx,  optionally  con‐
catenated  with  one or more of vuaibclo.  The files are con‐
stituents of the archive afile.   The  meanings  of  the  key
characters are:

d      Delete files from the archive file.

r      Replace  files  in  the  archive  file, or add them if
       missing.  Optional modifiers are

       u      Replace only files with  modified  dates  later
              than that of the archive.

       a      Place  new  files  after posname in the archive
              rather than at the end.

       b or i Place new files before posname in the archive.

q      Quick.  Append files to the end of the archive without
       checking for duplicates.  Avoids quadratic behavior in

t      List a table of contents of the archive.  If names are
       given, only those files are listed.

p      Print the named files in the archive.

m      Move the named files to the end or  elsewhere,  speci‐
       fied as with

o      Preserve  the  access  and modification times of files
       extracted with the x command.

x      Extract the named files.  If no names are  given,  all
       files  in  the archive are extracted.  In neither case
       does x alter the archive file.

v      Verbose.  Give a file-by-file description of the  mak‐
       ing of a new archive file from the old archive and the
       constituent files.  With p, precede each file  with  a
       name.   With t, give a long listing of all information
       about the files, somewhat like  a  listing  by  ls(1),
       showing
            mode uid/gid size date name

c      Create.   Normally  iar will create a new archive when
       afile does not exist, and give a  warning.   Option  c
       discards any old contents and suppresses the warning.

l      Local.  Normally iar places its temporary files in the
       directory /tmp.  This option causes them to be  placed
       in the local directory.

When a d, r, or m key is specified and all members of the ar‐
chive are valid object files for the same  architecture,  iar
inserts  a table of contents, required by the loaders, at the
front of the library.  The table of contents is rebuilt when‐
ever the archive is modified, except when the q key is speci‐
fied or when the table of contents  is  explicitly  moved  or
deleted.

== example
iar cr lib.a *.v
       Replace  the contents of library with the object files
       in the current directory.

== files
/tmp/v*
       temporaries

== source
/utils/iar

== see ALSO
2l(10.1), ar(10.6)

== bugs
If the same file is mentioned twice in an argument  list,  it
may be put in the archive twice.
The  file format used by this command is taken from UNIX, and
makes some invalid assumptions, for instance  that  user  IDs
are numeric.

