= qlock,  qunlock,  canqlock,  rlock, runlock, wlock, wunlock: serial synchronisation

    void qlock(QLock *l)

    void qunlock(QLock *l)

    int  canqlock(QLock *l)

    void rlock(RWlock *l)

    void runlock(RWlock *l)

    int  canrlock(RWlock *l)

    void wlock(RWlock *l)

    void wunlock(RWlock *l)

The primitive locking functions described in lock(10.2) guar‐
antee  mutual  exclusion,  but they implement spin locks, and
should not be used if the process might sleep(10.2) within  a
critical  section.   The following functions serialise access
to a resource by forming an orderly queue of processes.

Each resource to be controlled is given an  associated  QLock
structure;  it  is  usually  most  straightforward to put the
QLock in the structure that represents the resource.  It must
be  initialised  to zero before use (as guaranteed for global
variables and for structures allocated by malloc).

On return from qlock, the process has acquired  the  lock  l,
and  can  assume exclusive access to the associated resource.
If the lock is  not  immediately  available,  the  requesting
process  is  placed  on  a  FIFO queue of processes that have
requested the lock.  Processes on this list  are  blocked  in
the state.

Qunlock  unlocks l and schedules the first process queued for
it (if any).

Canqlock is a non-blocking form of qlock.  It tries to obtain
the  lock  l and returns true if successful, and 0 otherwise;
it always returns immediately.

RWlock is a form of lock for  resources  that  have  distinct
readers  and writers.  It allows concurrent readers but gives
each writer exclusive access.  A caller announces its read or
write intentions by choice of lock (and unlock) function; the
system  assumes  the  caller  will  not  modify  a  structure
accessed under read lock.

Rlock acquires l for reading.  The holder can read but agrees
not to modify the resource.  There may be several  concurrent
readers.  Canrlock is non-blocking: it returns non-zero if it
successfully acquired the lock  immediately,  and  0  if  the
resource was unavailable.

Runlock  returns a read lock; the last reader out enables the
first writer waiting (if any).

Wlock acquires a write lock.  The holder of such a  lock  may
assume  exclusive  access  to the resource, and is allowed to
modify it.

Wunlock returns a write  lock.   The  next  pending  process,
whether reader or writer, is scheduled.

== source
/os/port/qlock.c
/os/emu/port/lock.c

== see ALSO
lock(10.2), splhi(10.2)

