= fs: host file system interface

    bind #Uspec /

    sys->bind("#Uspec", "/", Sys->MAFTER|Sys->MCREATE);

Fs provides an interface to the host file system when running
emu(1).  The device is automatically bound to the root of the
Inferno  namespace  when  emu starts.  Fs maps filenames from
the Inferno namespace to the real host filesystem  namespace.
The  mapping  is determined by the host system directory that
emu serves (see the description of the -r option in emu(1)).

The plain name #U always refers to the root  of  the  Inferno
tree  within  the  host file system.  An optional spec string
can select a different tree using conventions peculiar to the
host system type.  Currently, on Unix and Plan 9, a spec of *
(ie, #U*) refers to the root of the host system; on  Windows,
the  spec can give a device letter (eg, #Uc:) to refer to the
Windows tree on that device.

When there is nothing but root(3)  in  the  name  space,  the
device  can  only  be  bound  from Limbo using sys-bind(2) as
shown above, since there is nothing in the name space to sup‐
port  either  bind(1)  or  newns(2).  It can later be rebound
elsewhere in the name space using bind(1).

Fs provides only an approximation to the file  ownership  and
permissions checking defined in intro(5) and other entries in
this manual.  Emu(1) typically runs as the user  that  starts
it, and that user will own all newly-created files and direc‐
tories, and that user's host  system  access  rights  control
access  to  any file.  Other details are specific to the host
system, as given below.

The set of characters visible in file names within fs is also
determined  by  the  host operating system, not Inferno.  For
instance, names might contain  control  characters,  or  even
`/', which might render them unusable in Inferno.

   Unix
When  checking owner, group and other permissions, the intent
in Inferno is that each is tried  in  turn,  in  that  order.
Unix  checks  just  the  first that applies, so that if group
permission disallows access but other allows it,  the  access
is  still  denied.   If  emu(1)  is  run  as  the super-user,
Inferno's rules for ownership  and  permission  checking  are
enforced  by fs itself; otherwise, Unix's permission checking
prevails.

On MacOS X, file names might be case  insensitive,  depending
on file system settings.

   FAT file system (Windows9x and Windows/NT)
The values of uid and gid are Everyone.

Files  and  directories  always have read and execute permis‐
sion, which cannot be changed.  Files without  write  permis‐
sion cannot be removed.

   NTFS file system (Windows/NT, 2000, XP)
Permissions for read, write and execute operates as described
in sys-stat(2).  Emu(1) attempts to maintain  a  limited  but
consistent  map  between  Inferno and NT worlds, specifically
between Inferno names and NT security IDs.  Special NT  group
Everyone   represents  `other'  for  file  permissions.   The
Inferno uid is the file  owner  under  NT;  the  Inferno  gid
reported  is the first user in the file's ACL that is neither
the owner nor Everyone; failing that, the gid is  the  file's
owner.

== source
/emu/*/devfs.c
/emu/port/devfs-posix.c
