= mnt: attach to 9P servers

    #M

The  mount  driver  is used by Sys->mount (but not Sys->bind;
see sys-bind(2)) to connect the name space of  a  process  to
the  service  provided  by  a 9P server over a communications
channel.  After the mount, file operations in that portion of
the name space will be converted by the mount driver into the
appropriate 9P messages to the server,  and  its  9P  replies
returned as the status of the system calls.

Any  authentication  must  precede  mount,  which  does  none
itself; see security-intro(2) for a discussion of the authen‐
tication  and  security  mechanisms  provided `ready made' by
Inferno, but any other scheme can be  agreed  between  client
and  server.   The  mount system call does, however, issue an
attach(5) message to the server to identify the user  of  the
connection.  Each distinct user of a connection must mount it
separately; the mount driver multiplexes the  access  of  the
various users and their processes to the service.

File-oriented  system  calls are converted by the kernel into
messages in the 9P protocol.  Within the kernel, 9P is imple‐
mented  by procedure calls to the various kernel device driv‐
ers, as described in  intro(10)  and  dev(10.2).   The  mount
driver translates these procedure calls into remote procedure
calls to be transmitted as messages  over  the  communication
channel  to  the  server.   Each  message is implemented by a
write of the corresponding protocol  message  to  the  server
channel  followed  by a read on the server channel to get the
reply.  Errors in the reply message are  turned  into  system
call error returns.

A  sys-read(2)  or Sys->write system call on a file served by
the mount driver may be translated into more  than  one  mes‐
sage,  since  there  is a maximum data size for a 9P message.
The system call will return  when  the  specified  number  of
bytes have been transferred or a short reply is returned.

The  string  is  an  illegal file name, so this device can be
accessed directly only by the kernel.

== see ALSO
bind(1), sys-bind(2)

== source
/emu/port/devmnt.c
/os/port/devmnt.c

== bugs
When mounting a service through the mount  driver,  that  is,
when  the  channel  being  multiplexed is itself a file being
served by the mount driver, large messages may be  broken  in
two.
