= Screen: windows and subwindows on a display

    include   "draw.m";
    draw := load Draw Draw->PATH;

    Screen: adt
    {
      id:        int;
      image:     ref Image;
      fill:      ref Image;
      display:   ref Display;
    
      allocate:  fn(image, fill: ref Image, public: int): ref Screen;
      newwindow: fn(screen: self ref Screen, r: Rect,
                    backing:int, rgba: int): ref Image;
      top:       fn(screen: self ref Screen, wins: array of ref Image);
    };

A  Screen is the data structure representing a set of windows
visible on a particular Image such as the display or a parent
window.

id        When  a  Screen  object  is allocated (see allocate
          below), the system assigns it a unique integer, id.
          It  may  be  declared  ``public'' and accessible to
          arbitrary processes and machines with access to the
          screen's  Display.   The id value may be used as an
          argument  to  Display.publicscreen;  see  draw-dis‐
          play(2).

fill      When  windows are deleted from a screen, the system
          uses the fill image to repaint  the  screen's  base
          image.

image     The image upon which the windows appear.

display   The display upon which the screen resides.

allocate(image, fill, public)
          Allocate  makes  a  new  Screen  object.  The image
          argument provides the base image on which the  win‐
          dows  will be made.  The fill argument provides the
          Screen.fill image.  Allocate does  not  affect  the
          contents  of image; it may be necessary after allo‐
          cation to paint the base image with fill.

          Using a non-zero public argument allocates a public
          screen;  zero  requests  a  private screen.  Public
          screens may be  attached  by  any  process  on  any
          machine  with  access to the Display upon which the
          screen is allocated, enabling remote  processes  to
          create  windows on the screen.  Knowing only the id
          field of the original Screen,  the  remote  process
          can   call  the  Display.publicscreen  function  to
          acquire a handle to the screen.  The image and fill
          fields  of  a Screen obtained this way are nil, but
          they are not needed for ordinary window management.

screen.newwindow(r, backing, rgba)
          Allocates a window on the display at the  specified
          rectangle   with   the   background   colour  rgba,
          expressed in 32-bit RGBA format; the  return  value
          is  an  Image that may be used like any other.  The
          backing parameter  can  be  Draw->Refbackup,  which
          provides  backing  store to store obscured parts of
          the window when necessary, and is used by the  win‐
          dow  manager  and  its  clients;  or Draw->Refnone,
          which provides no refresh, and is used for  windows
          that  are  transient,  or  are already protected by
          backing store.

screen.top(wins)
          Top organizes a  group  of  windows  on  a  screen.
          Given  wins,  an  array of window images, it places
          the wins[0] element  at  the  top,  wins[1]  behind
          that,  and  so on, with the last element of wins in
          front of the all the windows on the screen  not  in
          wins.  Images in the array must be on the specified
          screen (nil elements are ignored).

