GEODESY(2)               System Calls Manual              GEODESY(2)

NAME
       geodesy - Geodesy module

SYNOPSIS
       include "geodesy.m";
       geodesy := load Geodesy Geodesy->PATH;

       # easting, northing
       Eano: adt{
            e: real;
            n: real;
       };

       # latitude, longitude in radians
       Lalo: adt{
            la: real;
            lo: real;
       };

       OSGB36, Ireland65, ED50, WGS84, ITRS2000, ETRS89: con iota;

       Natgrid, IrishNatgrid, UTMEur, UTM: con iota;

       init: fn(d: int, t: int, z: int);
       format: fn(d: int, t: int, z: int);
       os2en: fn(s: string): (int, Eano);
       en2os: fn(en: Eano): string;
       str2lalo: fn(s: string): (int, Lalo);
       lalo2str: fn(lalo: Lalo): string;
       str2en: fn(s: string): (int, Eano);
       en2lalo: fn(en: Eano): Lalo;
       lalo2en: fn(lalo: Lalo): Eano;
       datum2datum: fn(lalo: Lalo, f: int, t: int): Lalo;

DESCRIPTION
       Geodesy  provides  routines  to  deal with (some) terrestrial
       coordinate systems.

       Eastings and northings are defined by the Eano  adt  and  are
       measured  in  metres and latitude and longitude (which should
       be in radians) by the Lalo adt. Latitude is in the range -π/2
       to π/2 radians and longitude in the range -π to π radians.

       OSGB36  (Ordnance Survey Great Britain 1936), Ireland65 (Ire‐
       land 1965), ED50 (European Datum 1950), WGS84 (World Geodetic
       System  1984),  ITRS2000 (International Terrestrial Reference
       System 2000), and ETRS89 (European Terrestrial Reference Sys‐
       tem 1989) are the current datums defined. Helmert transforma‐
       tions are used to convert between them. Note  that  Ireland65
       and  ED50  are currently not supported and WGS84 and ITRS2000
       are considered equivalent.

       Natgrid (National Grid), IrishNatgrid (Irish National  Grid),
       UTMEur  (European  Universal  Transverse  Mercator),  and UTM
       (Universal Transverse Mercator) are  the  current  transverse
       Mercator projections supported.

       The following functions are provided

       init   The  module  should  always  be initialized first. The
              parameters are the  required  datum  (default  WGS84),
              transverse  Mercator  projection (default Natgrid) and
              UTM zone (default 30) if appropriate. Negative  values
              or out of range values are ignored.

       format Parameters  as  above.  Alters the current settings at
              any time though care must be taken to ensure  existing
              coordinates  are  still  treated  as in their original
              form.

       os2en  Converts an Ordnance Survey National Grid reference to
              an  easting,  northing.   The  formats  XYen,  XYeenn,
              XYeeennn,  XYeeeennnn,  XYeeeeennnnn,  eenn,   eeennn,
              eeeennnn,  eeeeennnnn  and  eeeeeennnnnn  are allowed.
              Here X and Y are upper case letters, e is  an  easting
              digit  and  n  is  a northing digit. The reference can
              therefore be rounded  to  the  nearest  decakilometre,
              kilometre,  hectometre,  decametre or metre. The first
              element of the returned tuple is zero  if  the  string
              has an incorrect format.

       en2os  Converts  an  easting,  northing to an OS reference in
              the form XYeeeeennnnn as  above.

       str2lalo
              Converts a latitude/longitude string  to  a  latitude,
              longitude.  The  string may have the formats deg[N|S],
              deg:min[N|S]   or   deg:min:sec[N|S]   for   latitude,
              deg[E|W],  deg:min[E|W] or deg:min:sec[E|W] for longi‐
              tude. The latitude  must  come  first,  then  optional
              white space, then the longitude.  Degrees, minutes and
              seconds may be integer  or  real.  Format  errors  are
              indicated as in os2en.

       lalo2str
              Converts  a  latitude,  longitude  to string format as
              above. Seconds are given to two decimal places.

       str2en Converts a string in OS or  latitude/longitude  format
              as above to an easting, northing.  Format errors indi‐
              cated as in os2en.

       en2lalo
              Converts an easting, northing to  latitude,  longitude
              using  the  current  transverse Mercator projection.If
              the latter is UTM or UTMEur the current  zone  setting
              will be used.

       lalo2en
              Converts  latitude,  longitude to an easting, northing
              using the current transverse Mercator projection.

       datum2datum
              Approximate (Helmert) transformation  of  a  latitude,
              longitude  between  any  of OSGB36, WGS84, ITRS2000 or
              ETRS89.  The `from' datum appears first in the parame‐
              ter list.

SOURCE
       /module/math/geodesy.m
       /appl/math/geodesy.b

BUGS
       The module is heavily biased towards Great Britain.

                                                          GEODESY(2)
