= Popup: mkbutton, changebutton, event, add: popup list box pseudo-widget

    include "popup.m";
    popup := load Popup Popup->PATH;

    init:         fn();
    mkbutton:     fn(win: ref Tk->Toplevel, name: string,
                     items: array of string, n: int): chan of string;
    changebutton: fn(win: ref Tk->Toplevel, name: string,
                     items: array of string, n: int);
    event:        fn(win: ref Tk->Toplevel, e: string,
                     items: array of string): int;
    add:          fn(items: array of string, s: string):
                     (array of string, int);

Popup implements popup list boxes as Tk pseudo-widgets.  This
module  has  since  been  superseded by choicebutton(2) in Tk
itself, but remains for the moment for compatibility.

Init must be called once to initialise the module.

Mkbutton creates a new button name, in Tk toplevel  win.   It
returns  a  channel  on  which it delivers events (see event,
below).  Once created, name can be packed like any  other  Tk
widget.   When  the  button  is pressed with button 1, a menu
pops up offering a choice from the given items.  The value  n
is  the  index  in  items of the button's initial value.  The
current choice is always displayed in the button.   If  items
is  nil  or  an  empty array, the string `-----' is displayed
instead.

Having created a popup button, the application  must  receive
values  on  the  channel  returned  by mkbutton and pass each
value it receives to event (as parameter e).  (Typically  the
application  will  receive on the channel in an alt statement
that watches other channels too.)  Event returns  the  result
of  a  selection,  or -1 if no selection was made.  In either
case, the text of the button name will reflect the  currently
active   selection   (the  application  can  fetch  it  using
`cget -text').  The items parameter must match that given  to
mkbutton (or most recently given to changebutton).

Changebutton  changes  the list of items in an existing popup
button name, and sets its initial selection to the item  with
index n.

Add  adds  string  s to the array items, if it is not already
there, and in either case returns the resulting new array and
the  index of s therein.  It is useful for calculating a list
of items dynamically.

== source
/appl/lib/popup.b

== see ALSO
tabs(2), tk(2)

