= open,  create :  open  a file for reading or writing, create file

    include "sys.m";
    sys := load Sys Sys->PATH;

    create: fn(file: string, omode, perm: int): ref FD;
    open:   fn(file: string, omode: int):       ref FD;

Open opens the file for I/O and returns  an  associated  file
descriptor.   Omode  is  one  of  Sys->OREAD, Sys->OWRITE, or
Sys->ORDWR, asking for permission to read, write, or read and
write,  respectively.   There are two values that can be OR'd
with those to form omode: Sys->OTRUNC says  to  truncate  the
file  before opening it, which requires write permission even
if omode is Sys->OREAD; and Sys->ORCLOSE says to  remove  the
file  when  it is closed (ie, when the last reference to this
file descriptor goes away).

Open returns nil if the file does not exist, if the file name
is unacceptable, if the user does not have permission to open
it as requested (see sys-stat(2) for a description of permis‐
sions), or if any other error occurs.

Create  creates a new file or prepares to rewrite an existing
file, opens it according to omode (as  described  for  open),
and returns an associated file descriptor.

If  the  file  is new, the owner is set to the user id of the
creating process group, the group to that of  the  containing
directory, and the permissions to perm ANDed with the permis‐
sions of the containing directory.  The bits in perm are  the
same as those in the file mode returned by sys-stat(2).

If  the file already exists, it is truncated to 0 length, but
the permissions, owner, and group remain unchanged.

The created file will be a directory if the Sys->DMDIR bit is
set  in  perm,  and  omode  is  Sys->OREAD.  The file will be
exclusive-use if the Sys->DMEXCL bit is set in perm  and  the
underlying  file server supports it; see open(5) for details.
It will be append-only if the Sys->DMAPPEND bit is  set,  and
the underlying file server supports it.

Create returns nil if the path up to the last element of file
cannot be evaluated, if the file name is unacceptable, if the
user  does  not have write permission in the final directory,
if the file already exists and does  not  permit  the  access
defined by omode, or if any other error occurs.

If  the  file is new and the directory in which it is created
is a union directory (see sys-intro(2)) then the  constituent
directory  where the file is created depends on the structure
of the union: see sys-bind(2).

Since create may succeed even if the file exists,  a  special
mechanism  is  necessary  for  applications  that  require an
atomic create operation.  If the Sys->OEXCL bit is set in the
mode  for  a  create, the call succeeds only if the file does
not already exist; see open(5) for details.

There is no explicit ``close'' routine: when the last  refer‐
ence  to  the  file descriptor is released, the system closes
the associated file.  For devices and network protocols where
shutdown  must  be  guaranteed, write a hangup message to the
associated control file and use the return value of the write
to verify closure.

== see ALSO
sys-intro(2), sys-bind(2), sys-stat(2)

