= announce, dial, listen: make network connections

    include "sys.m";
    sys := load Sys Sys->PATH;

    Connection: adt
    {
        dfd:  ref FD;  # data file
        cfd:  ref FD;  # control file
        dir:  string;  # pathname of line directory
    };
    
    announce: fn(addr: string):           (int, Connection);
    dial:     fn(addr, local: string):    (int, Connection);
    listen:   fn(c: Connection):          (int, Connection);

These  routines  in  the  Sys  module  are still used by some
existing code.  They are  deprecated,  and  new  applications
should use the Dial module described in dial(2).

These routines establish network connections.  Their descrip‐
tion uses the following definitions:

addr   is a network address in one of the following forms:

       network!netaddr!service
       network!netaddr
       netaddr

network
       Any directory listed in /net (eg, tcp), or the special
       token, net.  The name net acts as a free variable that
       stands for any network in common  between  the  source
       and  netaddr.   A  network name can be preceded by the
       full path name of a directory of networks,  using  the
       form /dir/network (eg, /net.alt/tcp).

netaddr
       A  host  name,  a domain name, a network address, or a
       meta-name of the form $attribute, which is replaced by
       value  from  the corresponding attribute-value pair in
       the connection server data base (see db(6)).

The functions dial and announce translate a given addr to  an
actual network address using the connection server cs(8).  If
a logical name addr corresponds to several network addresses,
for instance if a destination machine has several interfaces,
cs will return them all.  In particular, if addr is  net,  cs
will  return  addresses  on  all  networks that are common to
source and destination.  The translation  procedure  accesses
cs  using  its interface file cs, which is sought as follows:
first, in an explicit directory /dir if one was given in net‐
work;  second, in the standard directory /net; and finally in
the directory /net.alt (dial only).  If the connection server
cannot be found, the addr is used as-is.

If  a connection attempt is successful, the dir member of the
resulting Connection will be the path name of a  line  direc‐
tory  that  has files for accessing the connection.  One line
directory exists for each possible connection.  The data file
in  the  line  directory  is opened to make a connection, and
read and written to communicate with  the  destination.   The
ctl  file  in the line directory can be used to send commands
to the line.  See ip(3) for messages that can be  written  to
the  ctl  file.   The last close of the data or ctl file will
close the connection.  The remote file in the line  directory
contains  the  address  called;  the  file local contains the
local address assigned.

The dial routine makes a call to destination addr on a multi‐
plexed  network.   If  the  connection server returns several
addresses, dial tries each in turn,  until  a  connection  is
made  or  no addresses remain to be tried.  It returns a Con‐
nection containing a file descriptor dfd open for reading and
writing  the  data  file  in  the  line directory, and a file
descriptor cfd open for reading and writing the ctl file.  If
local  is non-empty, and the network allows the local address
to be set, as is the case with UDP and TCP port numbers,  the
local address will be set to local.

Announce  and  listen  are the complements of dial.  Announce
establishes a network name to which  incoming  calls  can  be
made.   In  addr, netaddr gives the name or address of one of
the local host's interfaces on which to listen for  calls  to
the  given  service;  it  can be * to listen for calls on any
interface on network.  Announce returns a  Connection  struc‐
ture in which only the cfd descriptor is open, on the control
file representing the announcement.  Listen takes as its only
argument  the  Connection  structure  of a successful call to
announce.  When a call is received, listen  returns  an  open
Connection  structure  as  if from dial, except that only the
cfd descriptor is open, dfd is nil, and the caller must  open
the data file for itself.

== examples
Make  a  call  and  return an open file descriptor to use for
communications:

       callkremvax(): (int, Connection)
       {
            return sys->dial("tcp!kremvax!80", nil);
       }

Call the local certificate signer:

       dialsigner(service: string): (int, Connection)
       {
            return sys->dial("net!$SIGNER!inflogin", nil);
       }

== source
/emu/port/inferno.c
/emu/port/dial.c
/os/port/inferno.c
/os/port/dial.c

== diagnostics
The integer valued functions return 0 on success  and  -1  on
error; the system error string is set.  The integer component
of the tuple returned by the other functions follows the same
convention.

== bugs
Note that listen does not open the data file.

