= fstat, fwstat, stat, wstat: get and put file status

    include "sys.m";
    sys := load Sys Sys->PATH;

    fstat:  fn(fd: ref FD): (int, Dir);
    fwstat: fn(fd: ref FD; d: Dir): int;
    stat:   fn(name: string): (int, Dir);
    wstat:  fn(name: string, d: Dir): int;

    nulldir: con Dir(special don't care values);
    zerodir: con Dir(all elements set to zero);

Given  a  file's  name,  or an open file descriptor fd, these
routines retrieve or modify file  status  information.   Stat
and  fstat retrieve information about name or fd into the Dir
member of the return tuple.  The int member will be zero  for
success  and -1 for failure.  wstat and fwstat write informa‐
tion back, thus changing  file  attributes  according  to  d.
Both functions return zero for success and -1 for failure.

File status is recorded as a Dir type:

Qid: adt
{
    path:   big;     # unique id for file on server
    vers:   int;     # write version number
    qtype:  int;     # file type (see below)
};

Dir: adt
{
    name:   string;  # last element of path
    uid:    string;  # owner name
    gid:    string;  # group name
    muid:   string;  # last modifier name
    qid:    Qid;     # unique id from server
    mode:   int;     # permissions
    atime:  int;     # last read time
    mtime:  int;     # last write time
    length: big;     # file length
    dtype:  int;     # server type
    dev:    int;     # server subtype
};

If  the file resides on permanent storage and is not a direc‐
tory, the length field returned in Dir by stat is the  number
of  bytes  in the file.  For directories, the length returned
is zero.  Some devices, in particular files that are  streams
such  as  pipes and network connections, report a length that
is the number of bytes that may be read from the device with‐
out blocking.

Each file is the responsibility of some server: it could be a
file server, a kernel device, or a user process.  Dtype iden‐
tifies  the  server  type,  and  dev says which of a group of
servers of the same type is  the  one  responsible  for  this
file.  Qid is a type containing path, vers and qtype members,
each an integer: path is guaranteed to be  unique  among  all
path  names  currently  on the file server; vers changes each
time the file is modified; and qtype gives the file's charac‐
teristics  (eg,  directory  or  file).   The  path is 64 bits
(big), and the vers is 32 bits (int).   Thus,  if  two  files
have  the  same  dtype, dev, and qid, they are the same file.
(Except when checking that the contents are the same, as in a
file  cache,  the  version  is often considered irrelevant in
that comparison.)  The bits in qtype are defined by

       16r80 # directory (Sys->QTDIR)
       16r40 # append-only (Sys->QTAPPEND)
       16r20 # exclusive-use (Sys->QTEXCL)
       16r08 # authentication file (Sys->QTAUTH)
       16r00 # any other file (Sys->QTFILE)

(They are the top 8 bits of Dir.mode for the  file,  as  dis‐
cussed   below.)    Sys   defines  constants  for  the  bits:
Sys->QTDIR, Sys->QTAPPEND, and so on, as  shown  above.   The
value  Sys->QTFILE  is not a particular bit; it is defined to
be zero, to allow a symbolic name to be  used  when  creating
Qid values for ordinary files.

The bits in mode are defined by

       16r80000000 #directory (Sys->DMDIR)
       16r40000000 #append-only (Sys->DMAPPEND)
       16r20000000 #exclusive-use (Sys->DMEXCL)
       16r08000000 #authentication file (Sys->DMAUTH)
             8r400 #read    permission by owner
             8r200 #write   permission by owner
             8r100 #execute permission (search on directory) by owner
             8r070 #read, write, execute (search) by group
             8r007 #read, write, execute (search) by others

There  are  constants defined in Sys for the first four bits:
Sys->DMDIR, Sys->DMAPPEND and Sys->DMEXCL for  normal  files,
and  Sys->DMAUTH  only  for  the  special authentication file
opened by sys-fauth(2).

The two time fields are measured in seconds since  the  epoch
(Jan 1 00:00 1970 GMT).  Mtime is the time of the last change
of content.  Similarly, atime is set  whenever  the  contents
are accessed; also, it is set whenever mtime is set.

Uid  and gid are the names of the owner and group (of owners)
of the file; muid is the name of the user that last  modified
the  file  (setting  mtime).  Groups are also users, but each
server is free to associate a list of  users  with  any  user
name  g,  and  that  list is the set of users in the group g.
When an initial attachment is made  to  a  server,  the  user
string  in  the  process group is communicated to the server.
Thus, the server knows, for any given  file  access,  whether
the  accessing  process  is the owner of, or in the group of,
the file.  This selects which sets of three bits in  mode  is
used to check permissions.

Only  some  of the fields may be changed by wstat calls.  The
name can be changed by anyone with write  permission  in  the
parent  directory.   The mode and mtime can be changed by the
owner or the group leader of the file's current  group.   The
gid  can  be changed by the owner if he or she is a member of
the new group.  The gid can be changed by the group leader of
the  file's  current  group if he or she is the leader of the
new group.  The length can be changed by  anyone  with  write
permission,  provided  the  operation  is  implemented by the
server.  (See intro(5) and stat(5) for more information about
permissions,  and  users(6)  for  how  to configure users and
groups when using kfs(4)).

Special values in the fields of the Dir passed to wstat indi‐
cate  that  the  field  is  not intended to be changed by the
call.  The values are the maximum unsigned integer of  appro‐
priate  size  for  integral values (usually ~0, but beware of
conversions and size mismatches when  comparing  values)  and
the  empty  or  nil  string  for string values.  The constant
nulldir in Sys has all  its  elements  initialised  to  these
``don't  care''  values.   Thus  one may change the mode, for
example, by assigning sys->nulldir to initialize a Dir,  then
setting  the  mode, and then doing wstat; it is not necessary
to use stat to retrieve the initial values first.

The constant zerodir has  all  its  elements  initialised  to
zero.   It can be used to initialise a Dir structure, for use
with styx(2) or styxservers-nametree(2), for instance.

== see ALSO
sys-intro(2), sys-dirread(2), sys-open(2)

