= Tk: toplevel, namechan, cmd, pointer, keyboard, imageget, imageput, quote, rect: graphics toolkit

    include "draw.m";
    include "tk.m";
    tk := load Tk Tk->PATH;
    Image:    import Draw;
    
    Toplevel: adt
    {
        display:    ref Draw->Display;
        wreq:       chan of string;
        image:      ref Image;
        ctxt:       ref Draw->Wmcontext;
        screenr:    Draw->Rect;
    };
    
    toplevel: fn(display: ref Draw->Display, arg: string): ref Toplevel;
    namechan: fn(top: ref Toplevel, c: chan of string, n: string): string;
    cmd:      fn(top: ref Toplevel, arg: string): string;
    pointer:    fn(top: ref Toplevel, p: Draw->Pointer);
    keyboard: fn(top: ref Toplevel, key: int);
    getimage: fn(top: ref Toplevel, name: string):
                 (ref Image, ref Image, string);
    putimage: fn(top: ref Toplevel, name: string, i, m: ref Image): string;
    rect:     fn(top: ref Toplevel, name: string, flags: int): Draw->Rect;
    quote:    fn(s: string): string;
    color:    fn(s: string): int;

The Tk module provides primitives for  building  user  inter‐
faces,  based  on  Ousterhout's Tcl/TK.  The interface to the
toolkit itself is primarily the passing  of  strings  to  and
from  the elements of the toolkit using the cmd function; see
section 9 of this manual for more information about the  syn‐
tax  of those strings.  Tkclient(2) is conventionally used to
create tk windows that interact correctly with a running win‐
dow manager.

Toplevel  creates  a  new  window called a Toplevel, which is
under the control of the Tk toolkit, on an existing  display,
usually  one  inherited  from the graphics Context (see draw-
context(2)).  The Toplevel is  passed  to  cmd  and  namechan
(q.v.)   to drive the widgets in the window.  Arg is a string
containing creation options (such as -borderwidth 2) that are
applied when creating the toplevel window.

Cmd  passes  command strings to the widgets in the Toplevel t
and returns the string resulting from their  execution.   For
example, given a canvas .c in the Toplevel t,
    x := int tk->cmd(t, ".c cget -actx");
returns the integer x coordinate of the canvas.

Bindings can be created in a Toplevel that trigger strings to
be sent on Limbo channels.  Such channels must be declared to
the  Tk module using namechan.  For example, to create a but‐
ton that sends the word Ouch when it is pressed:
    hitchannel := chan of string;
    tk->namechan(t, hitchannel, "channel");
    tk->cmd(t,
         "button .b.Hit -text Hit -command {send channel Ouch}");
    expl := <-hitchannel;     # will see Ouch when button pressed

Pointer and keyboard pass mouse and keyboard events to  a  Tk
window  for  delivery to widgets; they must be called by each
application, which usually  receives  them  via  a  Wmcontext
structure (see draw-context(2)) obtained from the window man‐
ager, often via tkclient(2).

Putimage passes an image and a mask into Tk.  If name is  the
name  of a Tk widget, it must be either a panel(9) widget, or
a top level widget (ie, ``.'')  ``.'')  or a menu widget,  in
which  case the associated image or window image is set to i.
(m is ignored for menu and  top-level  widgets.)   Otherwise,
name  must  be the name of an existing image(9) which has its
image and mask set to copies of i and m respectively.

Initially, a Tk toplevel has no image to draw  on.   Tk  uses
wreq  to  request new images of an external authority, and to
inform said authority when the images are to be deleted.  The
requests  are  formatted as per quoted in string(2), and hold
one of the following:

!reshape name reqid minx miny maxx maxy
       A new image for name is requested (name is either  the
       toplevel widget or a menu).  The desired rectangle for
       the new image is given by [minx miny maxx  maxy],  and
       the application should respond by creating a new image
       and using putimage to pass it to Tk.  Reqid is used by
       Tk  to  filter  out responses to out-of-date requests;
       when responding to a reshape request, the name  passed
       to  putimage  should  have a space and reqid appended.
       Tkclient(2) usually deals with the details of this.

delete name
       The image name has been deleted. This is generated for
       menu(9) widgets when they are unmapped.

raise name
       Tk widget name should be raised above other windows on
       the same screen.

lower name
       Tk widget name should be lowered beneath other windows
       on the same screen.

Wreq  may  be set to nil if an application is not prepared to
read requests sent on this channel.

Rect returns the bounding rectangle of widget  name  in  top.
Flags determines the form of rectangle returned.  If flags is
zero, the actual rectangle of name in screen coordinates, not
including its border, is returned. The bitmask flags that can
change this are:

Border Include the widget's border.

Required
       Return the rectangle required by  the  widget,  rather
       than the rectangle that has been actually allocated to
       it.

Local  Return the rectangle in coordinates  relative  to  the
       logical origin of the actual top level image.

Quote returns a string that is the same as its arguments, but
enclosed in curly  braces  and  with  internal  curly  braces
escaped.  This can be used to make an arbitrary string into a
word suitable as an argument to a Tk function.

Color returns a colour in 32-bit RGBA format corresponding to
the tk colour name s.  (see types(9) for details).

Screenr  gives  the  rectangle  of  the screen containing the
toplevel window.  Tk has no a priori way of knowing what this
is;  it  is  initially  set  to  the rectangle of the display
image, and may be set by the application if it  knows  better
(e.g. from the wmrect file served by wm(1)).

== source
/libinterp/tk.c
/libtk/*.c

== see ALSO
intro(9),  image(9),  panel(9), tkcmd(1), sh-tk(1), draw-con‐
text(2), tkclient(2), wmlib(2)
`An Overview of Limbo/Tk', this manual, Volume 2.

